--- Page 1 ---
1 
 
REVIEW OF BIS ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16 
The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) was set up on 01 April 1987 as a statutory body, taking 
over the functions of the erstwhile Indian Standards Institution (ISI). Its major activities 
include formulation of Standards, product certification, hallmarking, management systems 
certification, laboratory services and sales of Indian Standards and training services.  
Besides, it is also engaged in consumer related and promotional activities. 
 
BIS Act, 2016 has been notified by the Central Government on 22 March 2016 for general 
information. 
 
Major achievements of BIS during the year 2015-16, as reported in its Annual Report are 
summarized below: 
STANDARDIZATION 
BIS is formulating need-based Indian standards in line with the National Priorities in a time-
bound manner. It also harmonizes National Standards with International Standards in order 
to facilitate adoption of International Standards by all segments of industry and business.  
A total of 264 Technical committee meetings were held during 2015-16 to consider draft 
standards and related technical documents. It is the policy of BIS to formulate Indian 
Standards on emerging technologies and to withdraw obsolete standards.  
During the year, 609 standards (new 336 and revised 273) were formulated. The total number 
of standards in force, as on 31 March 2016 was 18781. 
 
 PRODUCT CERTIFICATION   
 
During the year, 3555 new licences were granted, which included 27 products covered for 
the first time under the scheme. The total number of Indian Standards which have been 
covered under BIS Certification Scheme are 941. The total number of operative licences as 
on 31 March 2016 was 31347. 
 
Surveillance and Licensees Meet 
 
During the year, a total number of 11763 inspections and 6665 lot inspections were carried 
out, in order to monitor the operation of licences. In addition about 22288 samples (including 
samples procured from market) were drawn for independent testing. In order to acquire 
feedback on the operation of the BIS Certification Marks Scheme, 49 review meetings with 
the licensees were organized. 
 
Foreign Manufactures Certification Scheme (FMCS) 
BIS has been operating separate certification Foreign Manufacturers Certification scheme 
(FMCS). Under this scheme, foreign manufacturers can seek certification from BIS for use

--- Page 2 ---
2 
 
of BIS Standard Mark on their product(s). During 2015-16, 68 licences were issued under 
FMCS, taking the total number of operative licences to 511 against 73 Indian Standards. 
 
Compulsory Registration Scheme  
The Compulsory Registration Scheme is being operated by BIS under the BIS Act, 1986 and 
the Rules framed thereunder. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology 
(DeitY) in consultation with BIS, notified "Electronics and Information Technology Goods 
(Requirements for Compulsory Registration) Order, 2012"  on 3 Oct 2012 mandating 
Compulsory Registration from BIS for 15 Electronics and IT products based on its safety 
compliance to Indian Standards. A second Order was notified on 13 November 2014, 
bringing 15 more electronics and IT products under the ambit of the Scheme. As on 31 March 
2016, BIS has granted 4279 registrations to manufacturers in various countries. 
 
LABORATORY SERVICES 
In order to support the activities of the product certification marks scheme, BIS has 
established eight laboratories in the country to cater to the testing of samples. The first BIS 
Central laboratory was established at Sahibabad in 1962. Subsequently, four regional 
laboratories, at Mohali, Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai and three branch office laboratories 
at Patna, Bangalore and Guwahati were established.  
During the year, the BIS laboratories have tested 15815 samples of various products covered 
under Certification. In addition, to support the Hallmarking Scheme of gold and silver 
jewellery / artefacts, the Gold Referral Assaying Laboratory at Chennai has carried out and 
issued 2559 test reports during the 2015-16. 
Laboratory Recognition Scheme 
BIS has established Laboratory Recognition Scheme (LRS) for recognition of outside 
laboratories (OSLs). The services of such laboratories are utilized when it is economically 
not viable to develop test facilities in BIS laboratories or when BIS laboratories do not have 
the required capacity. As on 31 March 2016, the total number of BIS recognized outside 
laboratories were 160, which include R&D organizations, technical institutions, Government 
laboratories and private sector laboratories. Besides this, services of 47 Government 
laboratories of specialized nature were also utilized for different products, as and when 
required. To support the newly launched BIS Registration Scheme, 23 outside laboratories 
have been recognized for testing electronic and IT products.  
 
HALLMARKING 
 
Hallmarking of gold jewellery was started by BIS in April 2000 to provide third party assurance 
to consumers on the purity of gold jewellery or its fineness. The scheme for Hallmarking of 
silver jewellery/ artefacts was launched in October 2005. As on 31 March 2016, the number

--- Page 3 ---
3 
 
of operative licences for Hallmarking of gold and silver jewellery were 14820 and 1067 
respectively. The number of operative BIS recognized Assaying & Hallmarking (A&H) centres 
was 370. During the year, about 3.49 crore articles of gold and silver jewellery/ artefacts were 
hallmarked and 36 jewellers’ awareness programmes were organized by BIS.  
 
Gold Monetization Scheme  
 
Ministry of Finance has launched Gold Monetization Scheme on 5th Nov.2015. BIS has 
played an important role in finalization and implementation of the Gold Monetization Scheme 
(GMS) in association with Department of Economic Affairs and Reserve Bank of India. Under 
the scheme Assaying & Hallmarking Centres recognized by BIS have been qualified to act 
as Collection and Purity Testing Centres (CPTC) and the gold collected by CPTCs is refined 
by refineries licensed by BIS. So far 47 A&H centres and one jeweller have been qualified to 
act as CPTC. Also, licenses have been granted to eight refineries for refining of gold under 
the GMS. 
 
Indian Gold Coin 
 
Hon’ble Prime Minister released on 5th November 2015 the first ever National Gold Coin with 
National emblem of Ashok Chakra engraved on one side and the face of Mahatma Gandhi 
on the other side. It is a matter of pride for BIS that the coin is engraved with BIS Hallmark. 
For manufacturing this hallmarked coin of 999 purity, the India Government mint, Mumbai 
and India Government mint, Kolkata were granted  license as per IS 1417:1999 during 2015-
16. 
 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM CERTIFICATION 
 
BIS is operating various Management Systems Certification schemes.  During 2015-16 BIS 
has granted 43 Quality Management System Certification licences, 8 Environmental 
Management Systems Certification licences, 18 Occupational Health & Safety Management 
Systems Certification licences, 2 Food Safety Management System Certification licence, 37 
Service Quality Management System Certification licences and 6 Energy Management 
System Certification licences.  As on 31 March 2016, the total number of operative licences 
was 1336. 
 
INTERNATIONAL 
ACTIVITIES 
AND 
TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION 
SERVICES 
 
BIS in its capacity as the National Standards Body of India, is a member of International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International Electro-technical Commission (IEC) 
and actively participates in the activities of these International bodies. It is actively involved 
in development of International Standards by acting as Participating (P) member or Observer 
(O) member on various technical committees and sub-committees; and nominating technical 
experts in working groups. As on 31 March 2016, BIS is a ‘P’ member in 418 Technical 
Committees/ Subcommittees of ISO and 80 Technical Committees/Subcommittees of IEC.

--- Page 4 ---
4 
 
Similarly BIS is ‘O’ Member in 224 Technical Committees/Subcommittees of ISO and 76 
Technical Committees/ Subcommittees of IEC.  
 
BIS is also engaged in regional and bilateral cooperation programmes pertaining to 
standardization, testing, certification, training etc. So far, BIS has signed 28 Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoUs) and 5 Mutual Recognition Agreements (MRAs) with National 
Standards Bodies of different countries. 
 
 
TECHNICAL INFORMATION SERVICES 
BIS provides technical information services to industry, importers, exporters, individuals and 
government agencies in response to their enquiries. Around 1900 enquiries were responded 
to during the period April 2015 to March 2016. 
 
TRAINING SERVICES 
 
During the year, National Institute of Training for Standardization (NITS) organized 111 
programmes for industry, 3 International training programmes and 21 programmes for BIS 
employees.  
 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
 
BIS endeavours to provide its services and the benefits of standardization and certification 
to all its stakeholders in a focused and time bound manner. The Consumer Affairs department 
of BIS handles various consumer related activities which include redressal of public 
grievances and organizing various awareness programmes for the stakeholders.  
During the year, 166 consumer awareness programmes, 49 industry awareness programmes 
and 30 Education utilization of standard programmes were organized. BIS carried out 128 
search and seizures all over the country on firms misusing ISI mark. 
 
PUBLICITY 
 
The publicity activity of BIS is aimed at creating awareness about various BIS activities 
among the industry and the consumer, mainly relating to standardization, certification of 
goods & services and Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery. The penal provision for unscrupulous 
practices like spurious marking was also publicized during the year to deter violators. The 
publicity during 2015-16 was done through print, electronic and other media like outdoor 
publicity, metro rail, Rail Sampark 139, public utilities and hoardings at airports and railway 
stations, cinema halls, etc.

--- Page 5 ---
5 
 
SALE OF STANDARDS AND OTHER PUBLICATIONS  
 
BIS sells Indian Standards and Special publications through 24 different sales outlets located 
at the Headquarters (HQs), Regional offices and Branch Offices. Sale is also done through 
registered booksellers. BIS also sells foreign standards like ISO, IEC, BSI London, DIN 
Germany, JIS Japan in India. BIS sells Indian Standards through its e-portal and through 
DVDs. 
 
HINDI ACTIVITIES 
 
BIS is following all the directions issued by the Department of Official Language regarding 
use of Hindi and related activities. Official Language Committee of BIS HQ conducted all its 
four quarterly meetings on time. The Second Sub Committee of Committee of Parliament on 
Official Language inspected Vishakhapatnam, Rajkot and Mumbai offices during 2015-16. 
During the period, 68 standards were translated and titles of 670 standards were also made 
bilingual. 
 
PLAN SCHEMES 
 
Hallmarking 
 
 
BIS has been implementing the plan scheme for setting up of A&H Centres with central 
assistance.  The scheme of hallmarking is operative since Xth Plan and has also continued 
in the XIIth Plan.  The components of the scheme includes infrastructure building through 
setting up of A&H Centres in deficient locations and capacity building by way of providing 
training to artisans, auditors and other personnel engaged in hallmarking related activities. 
 
During 2015-16, BIS received Rs.375 lakhs under the Plan scheme from the Government 
and spent Rs.372.69 lakhs.  Seven artisan training programmes, one training of trainers 
programme and four A&H personnel training programmes were conducted during   2015-16. 
 
National System for Standardization 
 
The scheme of National System of Standardization (NSS) is to promote participation of 
experts in National and International standardisation. The Plan funds under the scheme are 
also utilized for organising ISO/IEC technical committee meetings and for holding various 
training seminars, workshops etc.

--- Page 6 ---
6 
 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND WORKS 
 
The works relating to construction of new office buildings of BIS at various places and 
renovation works in existing buildings were undertaken during 2015-16. 
BIS has also undertaken a 'green' initiative under which projects for installation of Rooftop 
solar power plants in BIS buildings are being undertaken through the Solar Energy 
Corporation of India.  
 
HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT, ADMINISTRATION AND 
GENERAL SERVICES 
 
Recruitment - During the year, 71 scientists were recruited for the post of Scientist-B through 
direct recruitment. As on 31 March 2016, a total of 1532 persons were on roll in BIS. 
 
Swachh Bharat Mission -    Special cleanliness drive was undertaken in all offices of BIS 
during 22 June 2015 to 15 August 2015 as per instructions received from Department of 
Consumer Affairs. 
 
Staff Welfare - BIS continued its welfare measures for its employees, namely, Group 
Insurance Scheme, facility of holiday homes, in-house service of a part-time doctor at HQ, 
subsidized refreshment, children scholarship scheme etc.  
 
Library Services - BIS technical Library located at headquarters is a national resources 
centre for information on standards and related matters and meets the needs of industry, 
trade, government, researchers and consumers alike. 
 
 
Constitution of Complaints Committee on Sexual Harassment of Women at Work Place 
In compliance with the guidelines of the Supreme Court of India on the prevention of sexual 
harassment of women at the work place, an Internal Complaints Committees have been 
constituted in BIS offices at New Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai and Chandigarh. 
 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
 
For the Twenty Seventh consecutive year i.e. 2015-16, BIS continued to be self-reliant in 
meeting its expenditure and other liabilities.  Total income (excluding income from 
investment) during the year 2015-16 amounted to Rs. 39082.83 lakh as against Rs. 34542.86 
lakh in the previous year making an increase of 13.14%.  The largest contribution to the 
income was from product certification marking Fee which stood at Rs. 32611.05 lakh during 
2015-16 against Rs. 30252.43 lakh in 2014-15 an increase of 7.80%. The total revenue 
expenditure during the year 2015-16 amounted to Rs. 23503.26 lakh as against Rs. 21095.90 
lakh in 2014-15 registering an increase of 11.41%.