--- Page 1 ---
1 
REVIEW OF BIS ANNUAL REPORT 2018-19 
 
The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), the National Standard Body of India was established 
under the BIS Act 1986, assuming the functions of the erstwhile Indian Standards 
Institution (ISI). BIS is responsible for the harmonious development of the activities of 
standardization and quality certification of goods and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
 
The Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016, was published for general information in official 
gazette on 22 March 2016 and the Rules and Regulations under the Act are being framed. 
 
Major achievements of BIS during the year 2018-19, as reported in its Annual Report are 
summarized below: 
 
 
STANDARDIZATION 
 
The process of standards development adopted by BIS follows internationally accepted 
good standardization practices and is in compliance with the WTO-TBT code of good 
practice for preparation, adoption and application of standards. In the development of 
National Standards, BIS provides all interested stakeholders, with a neutral platform to 
come together and work towards common agreements. BIS currently provides a forum for 
335 Sectional Committees, representing over a thousand experts from organized 
consumers and consumer bodies, regulatory and other government bodies, industries, 
scientists, technologists, testing organizations and individual experts. These committees 
work to develop consensus based voluntary National standards with stakeholder 
consultations. 
 
A total of 340 Technical committee meetings were held during 2018-19, to consider draft 
standards and related technical documents in detail. It is the policy of BIS to formulate 
Indian Standards on emerging technologies and to withdraw obsolete standards.  
 
During 2018-19, 1796 (new 980 and revised 816) standards were published. The total 
number of standards in force, as on 31 March 2019 was 20227. 
 
 
CERTIFICATION 
 
During 2018-19, BIS operated the Product Certification Scheme under the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules framed there-under and BIS (Conformity Assessment) 
Regulations, 2018. Under this Certification scheme, a manufacturer of a particular product 
is given the self-marking rights of the BIS standards mark (ISI mark) on his product after 
ensuring that his product complies with the relevant Indian Standard. Presence of Standard 
Mark (popularly known as ISI mark) on a product indicates its conformity to the relevant 
Indian Standard. The certification scheme is voluntary in nature, except for 136 product 
standards that have been made mandatory by the Central Government on considerations 
of health and safety of the consumer.

--- Page 2 ---
2 
During the 2018-19, 4082 new licences were granted, which include 18 products covered 
for the first time under the scheme. The total number of Indian Standards which have been 
covered so far under BIS Certification Marks Scheme up to March 2019 was 966. The total 
number of operative licences as on 31 March 2019 were 34414. 
 
Surveillance 
 
In order to monitor the operation of licences, during the year, a total number of 12034 
inspections were carried out. In addition, about 23817 samples (including samples 
procured from market) were drawn for independent testing. 
 
Foreign Manufactures Certification Scheme (FMCS) 
 
BIS has been operating separate Scheme for foreign manufacturers. Under this Scheme, 
foreign manufacturers can seek certification from BIS for use of BIS Standard Mark on their 
product(s). During 2018-19, 264 licences were issued under FMCS, taking the total number 
of operative licences to 874 against 99 Indian Standards. The licences granted covered 
products such as steel & steel products; cement; PVC insulated cables; tyres & tubes for 
automotive vehicles; plastic feeding bottles; switchgear products; plugs & socket-outlets and 
switches; HDPE & UPVC Pipes; Infant milk formula; ac static energy meters etc. from about 
51 countries. 
 
Compulsory Registration Scheme (CRS) 
 
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), then known as  
Department of Electronics & Information Technology (DeitY), in consultation with BIS, 
notified ‘Electronics and Information Technology Goods (Requirements for Compulsory 
Registration) Order, 2012’ on 3 October 2012 mandating Compulsory Registration from BIS 
for 15 Electronics and Information Technology products based on its safety compliance to 
Indian Standards. A second Order was notified on 13 November 2014, bringing 15 more 
electronics and Information Technology products under the ambit of the Scheme. MeitY 
has further notified requirement of Indian Language Support for Mobile Phones vide their 
notification dated 24 October 2016. Further, MeitY notified 13 more product categories in 
third phase of the order dated 23 August 2017. 
Ministry of New and Renewal Energy (MNRE) vide their notification dated 05 September 
2017 notified 5 products under the Solar Photovoltaics, Systems, Devices and Components 
Goods (Requirements for Compulsory Registration) Order, 2017. 
 
The Compulsory Registration Scheme is being operated by BIS under the Scheme – II of 
Schedule – II of the BIS (Conformity Assessment) Regulations, 2018. 
 
The first licence was granted by BIS in June 2013. As on 31 March 2019, BIS has granted 
17251 licences to manufacturers in various countries including domestic manufacturers. 
 
 
LABORATORY SERVICES 
 
One of the main pillars of conformity assessment is product testing to ascertain the 
conformity of products to relevant standards. BIS has established eight laboratories in the 
country to cater to the testing need of samples generated from conformity assessment

--- Page 3 ---
3 
schemes, beginning with the establishment of Central Laboratory at Sahibabad in 1962. 
Subsequently, four regional laboratories at Mohali, Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai and three 
branch office laboratories at Patna, Bangalore and Guwahati were established. BIS 
laboratories have facilities for testing of products in the field of chemical, microbiological, 
electrical and mechanical requirements. In addition to product testing, BIS has established 
gold assaying lab at Chennai, Sahibabad and Kolkata. Gold assaying lab at Chennai is a 
referral lab and also tests silver jewellery. 
BIS labs have complete test facilities for 398 Indian Standards and in addition, partial test 
facilities are also available for 320 Indian Standards.  During the year 2018-19, the BIS 
laboratories have tested 19532 samples of various products covered under Certification. In 
addition, the Gold Referral Assaying Laboratory at Chennai and Sahibabad have issued 
5139 test reports during the year 
 
Lab Recognition Scheme 
As the volume of work for testing of samples generated from conformity assessment 
schemes is much larger than the available capacity in BIS labs, BIS has established 
Laboratory Recognition Scheme (LRS) for recognition of outside laboratories (OSLs). The 
services of such laboratories are utilized when it is economically not viable to develop test 
facilities in BIS labs or when BIS labs are overloaded. The scheme is based on 
International Standard IS/ISO/IEC 17025, and in line with the criteria adopted by the 
National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) for 
accreditation of laboratories.  
During the year, 35 new labs were recognized and 08 labs were de-recognized. As on 31 
March 2019, the total no. of operative BIS recognized labs were 237, which include reputed 
R&D organizations, technical institutions, Govt. labs and Private sector labs (Government 
labs – 76 and Private labs - 161).  Besides this, services of 253 Government laboratories of 
specialized nature are utilized for different products, as and when required.   
To support the newly launched BIS Compulsory Registration Scheme, 65 outside labs are 
testing IT products, which were covered under Electronics and Information Technology 
Goods (Requirement for Compulsory Registration) Order, 2012. 
 
Quality Assurance Activities 
Quality Assurance is a regular part of testing in BIS Labs by way of which the quality of 
testing is assured. During the year, 901 Samples were tested under Quality Assurance 
activities by BIS Labs. These also include the samples tested during participation in 
proficiency testing/ inter-lab comparison program. 
 
Training 
The manpower working in labs are being trained on regular basis to keep them abreast of 
the latest developments. During the year, 66 BIS officials were trained for IS/ISO/IEC 
17025 Laboratory Quality Management System. 
 
 
HALLMARKING 
 
Hallmarking of gold jewellery was launched by BIS in April 2000 to provide third party 
assurance to consumers on the purity of gold jewellery or its fineness. The scheme for 
Hallmarking of silver jewellery/ artefacts was launched in October 2005. Under these 
Scheme, while the jewellers are granted licence to sell hallmarked jewellery, Assaying &

--- Page 4 ---
4 
Hallmarking (A&H) centres are recognized to assay the purity of the jewellery submitted by 
the licensed jeweller, along with declaration of purity.  
 
As on 31 March 2019, the number of operative licences for Hallmarking of gold and silver 
jewellery were 24623 and 2065 respectively. The number of operative BIS recognized A&H 
centres was 797. During the year, 4.49 crore articles of gold and silver jewellery/ artefacts 
were hallmarked.  
 
Hallmark of Gold Bullion/Coin 
Hallmarking of gold Bullion/Coin in the fineness of 999 & 995 by giving licence to 
refineries/Mint was started in October 2015. During 2018-19, eleven licences have been 
granted to the refineries for the hallmarking of gold Bullions/Coins. As on 31 March 2019, 
25 licences have been granted to refineries/ India Government Mint for Gold bullion and 
coin.  
 
Gold Monetization Scheme 
Government of India has launched Gold Monetization Scheme on 5 November 2015. BIS 
has played an important role in finalization and implementation of the Gold Monetization 
Scheme in association with Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance and 
Reserve Bank of India. Under the scheme A&H Centres recognized by BIS have been 
qualified to act as Collection and Purity Testing Centres (CPTC). So far 48 A&H centres 
and one Jeweller have been qualified to act as CPTC. The gold collected by CPTCs is to 
be refined by refineries licenced by BIS.  
 
Promotion of Hallmarking 
 
To promote hallmarking in the country and for effective consumer protection, awareness 
programmes are organized by BIS through its various Regional and Branch offices across 
the country. During 2018-19, 58 such jewellers’ awareness programmes were organized.  
 
 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM CERTIFICATION 
 
BIS is operating various Management Systems Certification schemes. As on 31 March 
2019, 797 Quality Management System Certification (QMS) licences, 189 Environmental 
Management Systems (EMS) Certification licences, 111 Occupational Health & Safety 
Management Systems (OHSMS) Certification licences, 01 Hazards Analysis and Critical 
Control Point (HACCP) stand-alone licences,  24 HACCP licences integrated with QMS, 22 
Food Safety Management System (FSMS) licences, 108 Service Quality Management 
System (SQMS) licences, 28 Energy Management System (EnMS) licences, 01 one 
Medical Devices Management System (MDMS), 01 Road Traffic Safety Management 
Systems licence, 01 licence Ready Mixed Concrete licence, 01 Social Accountability 
Management Systems licence were in operation. 
 
As on 31st March 2019, a total of 1284 operative licences exist under the Management 
Systems Certification schemes being operated by BIS. 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES AND TECHNICAL INFORMATION 
SERVICES

--- Page 5 ---
5 
BIS in its capacity as the National Standards Body of India, is a member of International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) and through the Indian National Committee is a 
member of International Electro-technical Commission (IEC). BIS actively participates in 
the activities of these International bodies and is involved in development of International 
Standards as Participating (P) member or Observer (O) member on various Technical 
Committees and Sub-Committees; and nominates technical experts in Working Groups of 
these bodies. As on 31 March 2019, BIS is a ‘P’ member in 456 Technical Committees/ 
Subcommittees of ISO and 91 Technical Committees/Subcommittees of IEC, and ‘O’ 
Member in 204 Technical Committees/Subcommittees of ISO and 77 Technical 
Committees/ Subcommittees of IEC. The Secretariat of 10 important ISO Committees 
dealing with subjects that are of interest to India are being held by our country through BIS. 
Chairmanship of IEC Technical Committee IEC TC 33 “Power capacitors and their 
applications” is also held by India. 
 
India is currently a member in ISO Council, represented by DG BIS, the apex policy 
committee of ISO (Term 2017-19) and a member of ISO Council Standing Committee on 
Finance (CSC/FIN) and ISO Council Standing Committee on Oversight (CSC/OVE) for 
term 2018-19. 
 
BIS has entered into Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) and Bilateral Cooperation 
Agreements (BCAs) with the National Standards Bodies of various countries for 
cooperation in the areas of standards, Conformity assessment, testing and training/ 
capacity building and for mutual acceptance of each other’s conformity assessment results 
respectively. BIS has so far signed 30 MoUs and 7 BCAs of which 02 MoUs were 
concluded during 2018-19. 
 
TECHNICAL INFORMATION SERVICES & WTO-TBT ENQUIRY POINT 
 
BIS provides technical information services in the field of standards and conformity 
assessment to industry, importers, exporters and government agencies in response to their 
enquiries. Around 200 enquiries were responded during the period from April 2018 to 
March 2019. 
 
Sponsorship of Identification Numbers 
 
 Issuer Identification Number (IIN) 
BIS facilitates issue of IINs as per ISO/IEC 7812 ‘Identification Cards - Identification of 
issuers’ by sponsoring applications of Banks/ Financial Organizations to the American 
Bankers Association (ABA). The ISO/IEC 7812 specifies a numbering system for the 
identification of issuers of the identification cards used in international and/ or inter-industry 
interchange.  
 
 World Manufacturer Identifier (WMI) Number 
In co-ordination with the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), USA; BIS issues WMI 
Codes as per ISO 3780 : 2009 ‘Road Vehicles - World Manufacturer Identifier (WMI) Code’ 
to automobile manufacturers and exporters in India. 143 WMI Codes have been allotted to 
various vehicle manufacturers during 2018-19. 
 
 
TRAINING SERVICES

--- Page 6 ---
6 
 
National Institute of Training for Standardization (NITS) was set up under the aegis of BIS 
in 1995 to meet the growing needs and expectations of the industry for quality training in 
the fields of standardization, quality assurance, management systems, certification, 
laboratory testing, etc.  NITS has also been organizing various International Training 
Programmes for the developing countries of Asia, Africa, Europe and Latin and South 
America.  The programmes are conducted by a team of well-experienced, qualified and 
trained faculty. 
 
During year 2018-19, NITS conducted a number of training programmes for the Industry, 
International participants and BIS employees. There has been an increase in the number of 
programmes organized during the period as well as the number of persons trained vis-à-vis 
the number of programmes carried out and the number of persons trained in the previous 
years. The total number of programmes conducted during this period is 196. The number of 
personnel trained during 2018-19 for the industry was 2720 which is about 1.53% more 
than the last year figures of 2679. 
 
 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
 
BIS endeavours to provide its services and the benefits of standardization and certification 
to all its stakeholders in a focused manner. The Consumer Affairs department of BIS 
handles various consumer related activities which include redressal of public grievances, 
organizing various awareness programmes for the stakeholders of BIS and holding of 
World Standards Day. 
 
During the year, 182 consumer awareness programmes, 72 Industry awareness 
programmes, 40 Educational Utilization of Standards Programmes were organized across 
the country. 
 
World Standards Day:  
BIS celebrated the World Standards Day on 15 Nov 2018 at New Delhi to pay tribute to the 
collaborative efforts of thousands of experts worldwide, which develop voluntary technical 
agreements that are published as International or National Standards. The World 
Standards Day theme for the year 2018 was ‘International Standards and Fourth Industrial 
Revolution’. BIS on the occasion also organized a seminar on this theme. World Standards 
Day programmes were also held across the country by BIS Regional and Branch Offices. 
 
 
PUBLICITY 
 
The publicity activity of BIS is aimed at creating awareness for BIS and its key activities 
among its target audience including the Industry and common Consumer and other 
stakeholders, significantly relating to Standardization, Certification of goods & services and 
Hallmarking. The publicity was done through print, electronic, outdoor media and digital 
media laying special emphasis on social media. 
 
Publicity campaigns were taken up aiming at persuading consumers to buy ISI Marked 
goods and Hallmarked Gold Jewellery. Consumers were also informed about the 
mechanism regarding the redressal of complaints relating to BIS. Participation in popular

--- Page 7 ---
7 
consumer and industrial fairs/exhibitions to disseminate information on the various activities 
of BIS was also made at regional and branch level as well. 
 
 
 
 
 
SALE OF STANDARDS AND OTHER PUBLICATIONS 
 
BIS sells Indian Standards and Special Publications through 25 different sales outlets 
located at the Headquarters (HQs), Regional Offices and Branch Offices. Sale is also done 
through registered booksellers. BIS also sells foreign standards (ISO, IEC, BSI London, 
DIN Germany, JIS Japan) in India. BIS also sells Indian Standards through e-portal.  
Standards can be downloaded in the form of soft copy.  Alternatively, an order for hard 
copy can be placed through the e-portal.  Online payment can be made over the portal 
through credit/debit card. Customers can also make payment for standards through 
NEFT/RTGS. 
 
 
HINDI ACTIVITIES 
 
BIS is following all the act, rules, directions and orders issued by the Department of Official 
Language regarding official language. Official Language Committee of HQ conducted all its 
four quarterly meetings on time. The Second Sub Committee of Committee of Parliament 
on Official Language inspected CRO on 7.06.2019 and Faridabad and Ghaziabad on 
15.05.2019 and 19.01.2019. The Committee expressed satisfaction over the progressive 
use of Hindi in BIS. During the year, around 300 titles of standards were also made 
bilingual. 
Hindi Pakhwada and workshop were also organized during the year. 
 
 
PLAN SCHEMES 
 
Hallmarking: 
 
BIS has been implementing the Plan scheme for setting up of gold Assaying and 
Hallmarking (A&H) centres in India with central assistance.  
 
During 2018-19, BIS received ₹ 100 lakhs under this scheme and spent ₹ 49.23 lakhs. 20 
artisan training programmes, 08 A&H personnel training programmes and 04 Training of 
Trainers programme were conducted. One centre has been provided Central Assistance 
under the scheme during 2018-19.  
 
National System for Standardization: 
 
The scheme on National System for Standardization (NSS) under plan scheme is in 
operation.

--- Page 8 ---
8 
During 2018-19, BIS has received Rs. 100 lakhs and the same has been spent on various 
components of the scheme. 
 
 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SERVICES 
 
In line with the Government’s vision of Digital India and Ease of Doing Business, BIS is 
actively in the process of digital improvement of its systems. As a part of this endeavour, 
software have been made operational/upgraded for e-management of various 
activities/schemes of BIS such as Standardization, Product Certification Scheme, 
Compulsory Registration Scheme (CRS), World Trade Organization - Technical Barriers to 
Trade (WTO-TBT) notifications, National Laboratory Directory, etc. E-procurement has 
been operational through Central Public Procurement (CPP) portal of National Informatics 
Centre (NIC). BIS website (https://bis.gov.in) has been revamped in accordance with 
Guidelines for Indian Government Websites (GIGW). Further, BIS blog, social media 
handles like Facebook, Twitter, etc. have been created for e-interaction with various 
stakeholders.  
A comprehensive software (e-BIS) encompassing all activities of BIS has been envisaged 
with integration of all software and advanced features like data analytics, artificial 
intelligence, good MIS for effective monitoring, user-friendly interfaces, etc. Also, to 
supplement our digitization initiatives, the bandwidth in BIS offices is being upgraded to 16 
Mbps. 
 
 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND WORKS 
 
The works relating to construction of new office buildings for BIS Offices and renovation 
works in existing buildings is undertaken by Project Management and Works Department 
(PMWD) of BIS.   
 
PMWD has also undertaken a 'green' initiative under which Rooftop Solar Power Plants 
have been installed in BIS buildings through the Solar Energy Corporation of India. Net 
Metering Systems have also been installed at BIS-HQ, New Delhi, NITS, Noida and 
Hyderabad Branch Office. 
 
 
VIGILANCE ACTIVITIES 
 
The vigilance set up of Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) is headed by the Chief Vigilance 
Officer (CVO) and comprises of Vigilance Department at BIS Headquarters and a Vigilance 
Section in the Secretariat of each of the Disciplinary Authority for Group B, C & D 
employees (Deputy Director General concerned). 
 
The Vigilance Department functions in close coordination with Central Vigilance 
Commission (CVC), Central Bureau of Investigations (CBI) and Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food & Public Distribution.  It is entrusted with the responsibility of managing all 
vigilance related activities of the Bureau in accordance with the guidelines on the subject 
issued by Central Vigilance Commission and DoPT etc.

--- Page 9 ---
9 
 
HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT, ADMINISTRATION AND 
GENERAL SERVICES 
 
As on 31 March 2019, 1284 employees were on the rolls of BIS. 
 
Swachh Bharat Mission – During the year 2018-19, the Swachh Bharat drive was carried 
out in BIS in two phases i.e. 15 September 2018 - 02 October 2018 and 16 February 
2019 to 28 February 2019. 
 
Agreement for BNPL Scheme - The Bureau entered into an agreement with I.P.H.O., 
New Delhi on 05 March 2018, for sending the Dak through Speed Post under BNPL (Book 
Now Pay Later) Scheme. 
 
Staff Welfare - BIS continued its welfare measures for its employees namely by way of 
Group Insurance Schemes, facility of Holiday Homes, subsidized refreshments, medical 
facilities, Children Scholarship Scheme etc. 
 
Library Services - BIS technical Library located at Headquarters is a national resources 
centre for information on standards and related matters and meets the needs of industry, 
trade, government, researchers and consumers alike. 
SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WORKING WOMEN AT WORKPLACE -  In compliance with 
the guidelines of the Supreme Court of India on the prevention of sexual Harassment of 
women at the work place, an Internal Complaints Committee was constituted in Bureau of 
Indian Standards in Feb 1998 that has since been reconstituted vide OM No.Estt.-
III/ICC/76: 01/2018 dated 9 January 2018.  The composition of the newly constituted 
Internal Complaints Committee (ICC) at BIS, HQ- New Delhi consists of a senior level 
women employee as Presiding Officer along with two other members from BIS-HQ and one 
of the members from All India Democratic Women’s Association (AIDWA). New Delhi. The 
Internal Complaints Committee (ICC-HQ) celebrated “International Women’s Day at BIS 
HQ, New Delhi on 08 March 2019 with the participation of all employees posted at BIS HQ, 
New Delhi. 
 
FINANCE ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
 
For the Thirtieth consecutive year i.e. 2018-19, Bureau of Indian Standards continued to be 
self-reliant in meeting its expenditure and other liabilities.  The total income (excluding 
income from investment) during the year 2018-19   amounted to Rs.70579.52 lakh as 
against Rs.58736.57 lakh in the previous year resulting in an increase of 20.16%.  The 
largest contribution to the income was from Product Certification Marking Fee which stood 
at Rs.  55410.11 lakh against Rs. 49875.82 lakh in the previous year i.e. an increase of 
11.10%. The total revenue expenditure during the year 2018-19 amounted to Rs. 27901.09 
lakh as against Rs. 27168.34 lakh in 2017-18 registering an increase of 2.70%.