--- Page 1 ---
1
 
MANUAL  
FOR 
STANDARDS 
FORMULATION 
2022 
(Second Revision)
भारतीय मानक ब्यूरो 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS

--- Page 2 ---
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Standardization is to industry what culture is to society. 
- 
C. RAJAGOPALACHARI

--- Page 3 ---
iii 
 
 
 
 
MANUAL 
FOR 
STANDARDS 
FORMULATION 
2022 
(Second Revision) 
 
 
 
 
भारतीय मानक ब्यूरो 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS

--- Page 4 ---
(iii)

--- Page 5 ---
(iii)
FOREWORD 
 
Standardization is the process of formulating and applying rules for an orderly approach to a 
specific activity for the benefit and with the cooperation of all concerned, and in particular for 
the promotion of optimum overall economy taking due account of functional conditions and 
safety requirements. It is based on the consolidated results of science, technology and 
experience. It determines not only the basis for the present but also for future development, 
while keeping pace with technological developments worldover. The evolution of the concept 
of standardization has helped in codifying the existing knowledge and in bridging the 
international barriers on a continual basis, it being a dynamic activity. 
 
The erstwhile Indian Standards Institution (ISI) (now Bureau of Indian Standards) was 
established in year 1947 with the objective of harmonious development of standardization 
activity in India. Over the years various methods, procedures, etc were established for carrying 
out standardization activities in a more effective and efficient manner. The Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and subsequently the BIS Act, 2016 positions BIS as the National Standards 
Body for the harmonious development of the activities of standardization and to establish, 
publish, review and promote Indian Standards, in relation to any goods, article, process, system 
or service by a process of consultation involving consumers, regulatory and other Government 
bodies, industry, testing laboratories or calibration laboratories, scientists, technologists, and 
members of the Committees of the Bureau  through duly constituted committees. The 
standardization activities of BIS are carried out under the provisions of sections 10 and 11 of 
the BIS Act, 2016 and as prescribed under rules 22 to 30 of BIS Rules, 2018. 
 
BIS as the National Standards Body and India a signatory to the WTO-TBT Agreement, the 
standards formulation activity of BIS is aligned with the ‘Code of Good Practice for the 
Preparation, Adoption and Application of Standards’ (see Article 4 and Annex 3 of WTO-TBT 
Agreement). 
For formulation of Indian Standards, BIS functions through the technical committee structure 
comprising Sectional Committees under respective Division Councils set up for specific 
technologies and economic sectors. The Sectional Committees may be supported by 
Subcommittees, Panels and Working Groups which may be set up for dealing with specific 
group of subjects. The committee structure of BIS seeks to bring together all stakeholders’ 
interest in relevant standardization areas, so that standards are developed keeping in view 
national interests and after taking into consideration all significant viewpoint through a process 
of consultation. Decisions in BIS technical committees are reached through a process of 
consensus. 
The Manual for Standards Formulation is the main guidance document by which Indian 
Standards are developed and maintained. The rules for drafting and presentation of Indian 
Standards are covered in IS 12 ‘Guide for drafting and presentation of Indian Standards’. The 
provisions in this Manual are not to be considered as absolute requirements, but as principles 
and general guidelines on which common expectations can be met, whilst allowing some

--- Page 6 ---
(iv)
degree of flexibility in interpretation and application. This flexibility, however, has to be 
exercised based on what is appropriate, reasonable, necessary and practicable in any particular 
context with sound reasoning.  In case of any deviation, the provisions of BIS Act and Rules 
will supersede the provisions of this manual.  
 
This manual was first formulated in the year 1990 and subsequently revised in 2004. In the 
recent years many changes have taken place to address various aspects like the need for keeping 
pace with emerging technologies, sustainability considerations, trade priorities and other 
considerations that are relevant both nationally and globally. Further, over a period, various 
initiatives were undertaken by BIS to bring in improvements in this activity particularly in light 
of the Standards National Action Plan (SNAP) issued in 2019 and the objectives outlined 
therein, such as making standardization processes efficient and fast and enhancing stakeholder 
involvement, as well as in view of the use of digital technologies in standardization work. This 
second revision of the manual has been brought out to address all such developments, apart 
from number of other improvements. The major changes/incorporations in this version of the 
Manual are as follows: 
a) The document has been restructured addressing each of the four major areas covering 
management of technical committees, management of standards development, 
management of meetings, and participation in international standardization giving an 
account of the principles governing the processes and activities. Where applicable, 
reference to provisions in the BIS Act, 2016 and BIS Rules, 2018 have been made in 
relevant clauses of the Manual. The Manual is aligned with the provisions in the BIS 
Act, 2016 and BIS Rules, 2018. 
b) Recent initiatives and requirements covering the following have been addressed in the 
Manual in appropriate detail: 
1) Digitization of standards formulation activities through the Standards Portal, 
2) Action research based review of standards, 
3) R&D work for development of standards, 
4) Patents and copyright, 
5) Appeals provision, 
6) Annual Action Plan,  
7) Annual meeting calendar and increased meeting frequency, 
8) Provision and guidelines for hosting hybrid and virtual meetings, 
9) Code of ethics for technical committee members, and 
10)  Guidelines for engagement of consultants. 
c) The guidelines issued on ‘Structural Reforms in Standardization’ and ‘Effective 
Functioning of Member Secretaries of Technical Committees for Standards 
Formulation’ have been suitably incorporated. 
 
This Manual is for internal use of the Bureau and shall not be quoted for any legal purpose.

--- Page 7 ---
(v)
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
  
Title                                                                                                                                            Page No 
FOREWORD……………………………………………………….………….………….……….…………….. 
 
(iii) 
1  SCOPE………………………………………………………………..………............……………………..….
 
 1 
2  REFERENCES……………………..…………………………………………............................................ 
 
1 
3  STANDARD AND ITS PURPOSE…………………………………………….................................... 
3.1 Standard…………………………..…………..……….…..…….………………………………. 
3.2 Purpose of Standards………………………………...………….…………………………. 
 
2 
2 
2 
4  PRINCIPLES OF STANDARDIZATION…………………………….……….................................. 
 
2 
5  TERMINOLOGY…………………………………………..……………….……………………………….. 
 
3 
6  INDIAN STANDARDS…………………………………..….……….…….……………………………… 
6.1 Definition of Indian Standard…………………………...………………………………. 
6.2 Legal Standing of Indian Standards…………………………….…………………….. 
6.3 Implementation of Indian Standards…………………...……….…………………….
6.4 Interpretation of Indian Standards……………...……..…..…….…………………… 
6.5 Access to Information/Documents……..……………..……..….……………………. 
6.6 Digital Platform for Standards Development………..………….………………… 
6.7 Ensuring Harmonious Standards Development………...……….…................... 
 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
5 
5 
5 
7   MANAGEMENT OF COMMITTEES…………………..………..………..…………........................ 
7.1 Principles………………………………….…..…………..…….……………............................
7.2 Committee Constitution…………………………..…………….……………................... 
7.3 Nominating Organizations…………………………...………….……………................. 
7.4 Co-option to Technical Committees…………………..……….……………………… 
7.5 Committee Structure…………………………..……………….…………………………… 
7.6 Liaison Among Sectional Committees………………………...………………………
7.7 Chairs of Technical Committees………………...…………….……………………….. 
7.8 Appointment of Members of Technical Committees…..……...…………….…. 
7.9 Review of Committee Composition…………………...……....……………………….
7.10 Role of Technical Committee Members……………………...……………………. 
7.11 Training of Technical Committee Members and Chairs….….………………
7.12 Terms and Conditions for Engaging Consultants…………….……………….. 
7.13 Member Secretary………..…………………….…………….……………………………. 
 
 
6 
6 
7 
8 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
12 
13 
14 
14 
15 
(v)

--- Page 8 ---
(vi)
Title                                                                                                                                            Page No 
8  DEVELOPMENT OF INDIAN STANDARDS……………………….…...………………………… 
8.1 Principles………………………………………….………….…………………………………. 
8.2 Stages of Development………………………….…………….…………………………… 
8.3 Adoption of Other Standards as Indian Standards…………….……………….. 
8.4 Review of Standards………………………….……………….……………………………. 
8.5 Publication and Gazetting of Indian Standards…………….….………………… 
8.6 R&D Work for Development of Standards………………...….…………………… 
8.7 Appeals……………………………….……..………...……….………………………………… 
8.8 Patents and Copyright………………..…………….………….…………………………… 
 
20 
20 
21 
31 
33 
36 
37 
38 
38 
9  MANAGEMENT OF MEETINGS………………………………………….…………………………….
9.1 Principles……………………………………..….…………….………………………………… 
9.2 Annual Meeting Calendar………………………...……..…….………………………….. 
9.3 Conduct of Meetings and Subsequent Actions………….…….………………….. 
 
40 
40 
41 
41 
10  PARTICIPATION IN INTERNATIONAL STANDARDIZATION…….……………………. 
10.1 Principles……………………………………………………..…………………………………
10.2 General…………………………………………..……………...……………………………….
10.3 Participation in the work of ISO/IEC Technical Committees and 
Subcommittees…………………………….……………...…….………………………………….. 
10.4 Secretariat of Technical Committees and Subcommittees……..………….. 
10.5 Guidance on Processing of ISO/IEC Draft Standards for Casting Vote 
on Ballots………………………………….……………..….………………………………………… 
10.6 Participation in Meetings of Technical 
Committees/Subcommittees/Working Groups and other such 
Committees of ISO/IEC………………………………………………………………………….. 
50 
50 
50 
 
51 
52 
 
55 
 
 
57 
 
ANNEXES  
Annex  
Title                                                                                                                      Page No 
Annex A 
GUIDELINES ON REPLYING TO QUERIES ON INDIAN STANDARDS 
AND CERTIFICATION MARKING……………………………………………………. 
 
60 
Annex B 
ROLE OF CHAIRPERSON OF SECTIONAL 
COMMITTEE………………………………………...……………..….……........................ 
 
61 
Annex C 
GUIDELINES FOR PARTICIPATION IN THE TECHNICAL 
COMMITTEE WORK OF BIS.…………………………………………………………... 
 
63 
 
(vi)

--- Page 9 ---
(vii) 
Annex  
Title                                                                                                                      Page No 
Annex D 
BIS CODE OF ETHICS FOR TECHNICAL COMMITTEE MEMBERS……… 65 
Annex E 
LIST OF ESSENTIAL DOCUMENTS AND MATERIALS REQUIRED BY 
MEMBER SECRETARY FOR REFERENCE………………..……………................ 
 
67 
Annex F 
PROFORMA FOR ANALYSIS OF NEW SUBJECT PROPOSALS FOR 
TAKING UP AS NEW WORK ITEM PROPOSAL…………………….……………
 
68 
Annex G 
TYPICAL FORMAT OF AGENDA OF SECTIONAL COMMITTEE 
MEETING ………………………………………..……………………….…………………… 
 
73 
Annex H 
GUIDELINES FOR CONDUCT OF VIRTUAL MEETINGS (INCLUDING 
HYBRID MEETING)………………………….….……………...…………………………. 
 
 
 
 
76 
 
 
(vii)

--- Page 10 ---
(iii)

--- Page 11 ---
1 
 
MANUAL FOR STANDARDS FORMULATION 
(Second Revision) 
 
1 SCOPE 
 
1.1 This Manual  
a) describes the general aims and principles of standardization,  
b) explains functions of standardization set-up in BIS,  
c) outlines the procedures governing the development of Indian Standards, 
d) describes about the publication and application of Indian Standards, and  
e) explains the routine activities associated with these.  
 
1.2 The Manual does not cover the presentation and drafting of Indian Standards, which is 
covered in IS 12.  
 
2 REFERENCES 
 
The standards given below contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this manual. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this manual are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of these standards. 
 
IS 12 : 2005 
Guide for drafting and presentation of Indian 
Standards (fourth revision) 
 IS 12 (Part 2) : 2019/                  
ISO/IEC Guide 21-1:2005 
Adoption of International Standards 
 IS 12 (Part 3) : 2019/    
ISO/IEC Guide 21-2:2005 
Adoption of international deliverables other than 
International Standards 
 IS 1250 : 2021/                              
ISO 5776 : 2016 
Graphic technology – Symbols for text proof 
correction  
 ISO/IEC Guide 2 : 2004 
Standardization and related activities – General 
vocabulary 
ISO/IEC Guide 59 : 2019 
ISO 
and 
IEC 
recommended 
practices 
for 
standardization by national bodies 
ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1  
ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1 — Consolidated ISO 
Supplement — Procedure for the technical work — 
Procedures specific to ISO

--- Page 12 ---
2 
 
3  STANDARD AND ITS PURPOSE 
 
3.1 Standard 
A standard is a document, established by consensus and approved by a recognized body, that 
provides, for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for activities or their 
results, aimed at the achievement of the optimum degree of order in a given context (see ISO 
Guide 2). 
Standard can be a product specification, a code of practice, a terminology standard, a process 
specification, a service specification, a test method, system specification, dimensions, etc (see 
ISO/IEC Guide 2). 
NOTE – Standards should be based on the consolidated results of science, technology and experience, and 
aimed at the promotion of optimum community benefits. A Standard is a document setting out good practices 
established by consensus subject to public consultation and approved by a national committee. 
Rule 15 of BIS Rules, 2018 dwells on the establishment of Indian Standards in relation to any 
goods, article, process, system or service by the Bureau and in regard to their reaffirmation, 
amendment, revision and withdrawal by a process of consultation with stakeholders. The Rule 
also requires the Central Government or the concerned regulator to be consulted, in case a 
standard is being established at their request. 
 
3.2  Purpose of Standards 
Standards can (a) create an enabling framework - for attaining efficiency in processes, 
dissemination of technologies and achieving economies of scale; (b) enhance consumer 
protection and consumer confidence and thereby enable in market access; (c) facilitate trade 
by reducing technical barriers; and (d) support public policy objectives and provide suitable 
alternatives to support regulations. 
Standards aim to achieve the following: 
a) Defining requisite levels of quality, 
b) Ensuring safety and optimize human effort, 
c) Rationalization of use of resources, 
d) Convenience of use, 
e) Adoption of best possible solutions to recurring problems, 
f) Variety control, 
g) Interchangeability and interoperability, and 
h) Optimum cost. 
 
4 PRINCIPLES OF STANDARDIZATION 
 
4.1 Standards are characterized by being developed by a process of open consultation through 
technical committees that are broadly representative of balanced stakeholder interests and 
where decisions are arrived at by consensus.

--- Page 13 ---
3 
 
4.2 The standardization process in BIS is based on the following principles: 
a) Transparency – It implies among other things, access to work programmes, prior notice 
of draft standards, adequate commenting period and provision to make comments by 
interested parties. 
b) Openness - It envisages the right to participation in standards setting process by all 
relevant stakeholder interests and the right to access and apply/implement all standards. 
c) Impartiality and consensus - It ensures that there is no bias against or in favour of any 
specific stakeholder. Consensus in decision making implies taking into account the 
views of all parties and reconciling all conflicting arguments. 
Consensus is a general agreement, characterized by the absence of sustained opposition 
to substantial issues by any important part of the concerned interests and by a process 
that involves seeking to take into account the views of all parties concerned and to 
reconcile any conflicting agreements (refer ISO Guide 2). 
NOTES 
1 Achievement of consensus entails recognition of this wider interest and willingness to make 
reasonable compromises. Trivial or vexatious objections are unlikely to gain support and may 
be overruled. However, where a member consistently maintains a fundamental objection and 
supports it with sound arguments, these concerns will be taken seriously. If such objections are 
not voiced and sustained, normally within the context of a committee meeting where they can 
be put to the test, it will be assumed that consensus has been achieved. 
2 Clarification was sought from Additional Solicitor General by Legal Department (vide ref: 
Law/8/392/2004 dated 28 Jan 2004) and it was clarified that the word ‘consensus’ read with the 
phrase ‘substantial support’ indicates that the decision does not have to be taken on the basis of 
unanimity but having regard to the views of reasonably more than the majority of members 
reflecting different institutions/interests. 
3 For process of achieving consensus a reference may be made to ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1. 
d) Effectiveness and relevance – It takes on board the market needs as well as scientific and 
technological developments while keeping into consideration relevant regulatory 
requirements. Further, all standards are subject to systematic periodic review to ensure 
their continuing relevance and validity. 
e) Coherence - It envisages processes to be in place in order to ensure that there is no 
duplication, overlap and contradiction between various clauses of the same standard, as 
well as between two standards. This also implies that there should be coordination in 
standard setting between various standards developing bodies in the country in order to 
avoid duplication of efforts and to ensure harmonious standards development. 
The above principles are enshrined in the recommendations/guidelines contained in         
ISO/IEC Guide 59 and the WTO-TBT Code of good practice for preparation, adoption and 
application of standards. 
 
5 TERMINOLOGY 
 
The general terms and definitions contained in ISO/IEC Guide 2 along with the definitions 
contained in the BIS Act, 2016 and BIS Rules, 2018 shall apply.

--- Page 14 ---
4 
 
6    INDIAN STANDARDS 
 
6.1 Definition of Indian Standard 
 
‘Indian Standard’, as defined in the BIS Act, 2016, means the standard including any tentative 
or provisional standard established and published by the Bureau, in relation to any goods, 
article, process, system or service, indicative of the quality and specification of such goods, 
article, process, system or service and includes: 
 
a) any standard adopted by the Bureau under sub-section (2) of section (10) of the BIS 
Act, 2016; and 
b) any standard established and published, or recognized, by the BIS, under the BIS Act, 
1986. 
 
6.2 Legal Standing of Indian Standards 
 
Indian Standards are authoritative documents by virtue of these being established under the 
provisions of the BIS Act, 2016 and the rules thereunder. In order to command the trust and 
acceptance amongst the users, policy makers and others that are likely to be affected by it, 
Indian Standards need to be technically accurate and based on sound judgement of those 
responsible in developing these. The measures that are necessary to be put in place in order to 
underpin the confidence in Indian Standards is set out in the standardization processes and 
procedures outlined in this manual. It is the responsibility of all those who are involved in 
standards development to ensure that these are adhered to and are not compromised with. 
Adherence to these and their underlying principles are unstated preconditions for participation 
in development of Indian Standards. 
 
6.3  Implementation of Indian Standards 
 
All Indian Standards are by nature voluntary documents and their implementation is solely left 
to the discretion of parties interested to apply them. An Indian Standard shall be binding if it is 
stipulated in a contract or referred to in a legislation or made mandatory by specific orders of 
the Government. 
  
 6.4  Interpretation of Indian Standards 
Responsibility for interpreting a standard rests with its user. However, any clarification on 
provisions of an Indian Standard shall be made only by the technical committee or an expert in 
the committee responsible for it and such requests received by BIS shall be referred to them. 
Any ambiguity, inconsistency or errors brought to the notice of BIS will also be referred to the 
concerned committee responsible for the standard. If a committee finds that the wording of the 
standard requires modification to ensure clarity, the change is implemented by a published 
amendment. The clause(s) thus amended form the official reply by BIS to the original enquirer. 
Such matters need to be addressed on priority and procedure of consulting and decision through

--- Page 15 ---
5 
 
correspondence may be adopted for processing such amendments early. Detailed guidelines for 
responding to such queries on Indian Standards and their interpretation given in Annex A shall 
be followed. 
 
Matters requiring interpretation of standards not published by BIS shall not be dealt with by 
the relevant Sectional Committee dealing with the subject. These may be referred to the 
originating standards body, if required. In case such query is received on an international 
standard (but not adopted as an Indian Standard), the same may be forwarded to the concerned 
international standards body. 
NOTES 
1 The interpretation of Indian Standards in contractual disputes is ultimately a matter for the courts. 
2 In adopting an International or other text, technical committees of BIS assume responsibility for its 
subsequent interpretation as an Indian Standard. 
 
6.5  Access to Information/Documents 
As part of BIS’s commitment to transparency and accountability of the standardization process, 
the principal documents associated with the work programme of committees are available on 
BIS website/BIS Standards Portal, including all draft standards for commenting and 
composition of technical committees. Meeting related documents of technical committees and 
Preliminary draft documents have restricted access and are not publicly available. 
 
6.6  Digital Platform for Standards Development 
The entire standardization activity of BIS covering the management of committees, the 
development and maintenance of the standards including submission of standardization 
proposals, circulation of draft documents for comments, publication and notification of 
published standards, project management, management of meetings as well as related 
communication with committee members, are all carried out through a digital platform, the 
‘Standards Portal’. The platform provides necessary interfaces with committee members as well 
as the general public for such purposes, with different levels of access provision. 
 
6.7 Ensuring Harmonious Standards Development 
There are a number of Standards Developing Organizations (SDOs) in the country that are 
developing standards in their specific domain areas. Additionally, there are other bodies that 
are responsible for developing standards for the purpose of legislation/regulation and are 
therefore not standards in the true sense of the term. As the National Standards Body, it is 
desirable to ensure that there is synergy in the standardization work taking place in the country 
and that there is no overlap or duplication or conflict with the work carried out by other SDOs 
with that of BIS. Further, with increasing convergence of technologies there is also a need for 
better coordination of the work among all standardization bodies in the country working in 
different sectors. The national standardization work can be accelerated by aggregating and 
integrating the available capabilities in various organizations engaged in standards 
development in their specific sectors.

--- Page 16 ---
6 
 
With the objective of ensuring one national standard for any one subject in the country, a 
system of accrediting or recognizing other standards developed by other SDOs in the country 
as national standards needs to be considered. Rule 30 of BIS Rules, 2018 provides for the 
recognition or accreditation of institutions engaged in standardization, by BIS. A scheme for 
recognition of other SDOs in the country and for recognizing, where required, the standards of 
these bodies as Indian Standards have been instituted by BIS. This scheme additionally 
facilitates in ensuring that the process of standards development of the recognized bodies is 
compliant with the WTO-TBT Code of Good Practice and therefore aligned with globally 
accepted practices. 
 
7 MANAGEMENT OF COMMITTEES 
 
7.1 Principles 
Development of Indian Standards is through a process of stakeholder consultation and the 
collective output of a committee that is representative of different stakeholder interests on the 
subject. The process provides for consideration and validation of technical viewpoints and a 
dispassionate and impartial evaluation of comments and feedback from public consultations. 
All decisions taken shall be transparent and adequately justified while ensuring due regard to 
wider interests that are likely to be affected by them, including those that are potentially 
unrepresented and may not be directly involved in developing the standard. 
Each technical committee in BIS, that is Division Councils, Sectional Committees, 
Subcommittees, Panels and Working Groups, come under the authority of the committee that 
is responsible for constituting it, which also defines its scope of work and structure. Such 
committees also have the responsibility of overseeing the areas of work of the committees 
functioning under them and to coordinate the work with other related technical committees of 
BIS. Accordingly, the Standards Advisory Committee (having powers as delegated by the 
Governing Council of BIS) is the constituting committee in respect of Division Councils, the 
Division Councils for Sectional Committees and the Sectional Committees for Subcommittees, 
Panels and Working Groups under it. Panels/Working Groups, where necessary, may also be 
constituted under a Division Council or a Subcommittee. 
It is the responsibility of BIS to maintain a fair and comprehensive balance of interests within 
each committee (with the exclusion of Panels and Working groups) with the intention of 
ensuring that any one type of stakeholder interest does not have a predominant influence on 
decisions and any resultant bias.  
The Division Councils concerned are the ultimate arbiter in cases of dispute about 
representation on a sectional committee under its scope of work or in the case of any dispute 
between sectional committees concerning their respective scopes and programme of work. In 
case of dispute about representation in a Division Council or a dispute concerning two or more 
Division Councils, the Standards Advisory Committee shall be the arbiter. 
The procedures of standards development are governed by the BIS Rules, 2018.

--- Page 17 ---
7 
 
7.2 Committee Constitution 
The development of an Indian Standard is a collective effort and therefore needs to involve a 
wide range of concerned interests likely to have a stake in the standard. The committees should 
at the same time be able to provide the required knowledge and expertise on the subject as well 
as have a clear understanding of needs and expectations of those likely to use a standard or be 
affected by it. 
To achieve this, one of the objectives is to ensure that the committees provide a fair 
representation of the range of interests affected by the standard, particularly of the 
users/consumers. However, from practical considerations, as well as to achieve a fair balance 
of interests, committees have to be restricted to a workable size.  
BIS technical committees include organizations that have a legitimate interest in the work of 
the committee as determined by its scope of work. Individuals may also be eligible for 
membership in committees in their personal capacity based on their expertise, knowledge of 
and/or experience in the subject that would be of benefit to the work of the committee.  
BIS technical committees are representative of a balance of the following stakeholder interests: 
 
a)  Consumers 
: Organized 
buyers, consumer organizations, NGOs 
(with public interest objective) and user groups including 
government organizations and PSUs. 
b)  Government/Regulatory 
Bodies 
: Central/State 
Government 
Ministries 
and 
their 
departments and regulators 
c)  Industry 
: Manufacturing and service industry (including government
organizations and PSUs), consultancy organizations, 
industry/manufacturer associations, etc. 
d)  Technologists 
: R&D organizations, scientific institutes, academic and 
technical 
institutions, 
professional 
bodies/institutes, 
testing/ calibration laboratories, accreditation bodies and 
experts (persons in individual capacity) 
 
It is expected that those represented in a committee will effectively present the views/opinion 
of the nominating organization; and be able to provide expertise in some areas of the 
committee’s work. 
 
Membership in BIS technical committees are open to all and anyone desirous may apply to BIS 
for representation in one or more committees. Such requests are taken up by the concerned 
committees itself or the committee responsible for their constitution. However, committee  
membership is at the discretion of the relevant committees and it cannot be claimed as a matter 
of right. An organization seeking to only advance its own proprietary interest or deemed to be 
exploiting membership solely for its own commercial advantage is liable to be not considered 
for membership or removed from the committee.

--- Page 18 ---
8 
 
The constitution of a committee comes under regular review by the committee itself and the 
committee constituting it (see also 7.9). Further, all technical committees (other than panels and 
working groups) are reconstituted at least once in every three years. Details of committee 
membership are made publicly available by BIS on its website. Anyone who considers that a 
committee does not represent the markets or interests affected by a particular standard is free 
to raise this with BIS. 
 
7.3 Nominating Organizations 
 
Nominating organizations are expected to be committed to the principle of consensus based 
voluntary standardization and to the cause of contributing to national standardization efforts. 
Therefore, organizations and their nominated members are expected to forego their limited 
individual interests/bias in the wake of national considerations. 
Typically, nominating organizations are consumer organizations, regulatory and other 
Government bodies, industry, testing laboratories or calibration laboratories, academia, 
scientific and research bodies, etc. 
It is expected that members nominated to BIS technical committees maintain a close and 
effective liaison with the organization they represent. It is also expected that comprehensive 
briefings and reports are routinely exchanged for the purpose of evolving the organizational 
viewpoint on issues under consideration in these technical committees. It is further expected 
that nominating organizations will ensure that adequate resources are available to their 
nominated representatives in fulfilling their responsibilities as members of BIS technical 
committees. 
A nominating organization is expected to formally inform BIS of any appointment or change 
in appointment it wishes to make, also stating the nominee’s credentials. 
Member organizations nominate a principal and an alternate member to technical committees. 
Both the members are entitled to attend/participate in the committee meetings. At the discretion 
of the nominating organization and to encourage induction of next generation participants in 
standardization work, organizations may also nominate an additional representative as ‘Young 
Professional’ to the technical committees, provided such individuals are below the age of 37 
years. Nominating organizations are also encouraged to ensure gender balance in their 
representations. 
 
7.4 Co-option to Technical Committees 
Organizations and individual experts can be co-opted onto a BIS technical committee if they 
have specialist technical expertise required for a specific project or specific area of work. In case 
of co-options by committees themselves, the co-options are subject to ratification by the 
technical committee responsible for establishment of the committee co-opting the member.

--- Page 19 ---
9 
 
7.5 Committee Structure 
 
7.5.1 Standards Advisory Committee 
 
The work of national standardization is organized through the Standards Advisory Committee 
setup by the Bureau and the Divisional Councils, Sectional Committees, Subcommittees, 
Panels and Working Groups set up for dealing with specific areas, subjects or tasks. 
The constitution and responsibilities of the Standards Advisory Committee is defined in the 
BIS Advisory Committees Regulations, 2018. 
 
7.5.2  Division Council 
 
Division Council is a distinct committee of BIS, set up in defined areas of industries and 
technologies for formulation of standards. The title and scope of a Division Council shall be 
approved by the Standards Advisory Committee (delegated powers of the BIS Governing 
Council) and shall not be amended without its approval. 
The strength of a Division Council should normally be restricted to 40. Head of the technical 
department concerned of BIS shall be the Member Secretary. Chairperson of Sectional 
Committees under the Division Council may be invited to meetings of Council. 
The constitution, functions and tenure of Division Councils is prescribed under Rules 16 and 
19 of BIS Rules, 2018. 
 
7.5.3 Sectional Committees 
 
 
Sectional Committees are set up by the concerned Division Council. These may also be set up 
by the Standards Advisory Committee (delegated powers of the Governing Council) to deal 
with a field not covered by any Division Council.  
The constitution of Sectional Committees is prescribed under Rule 17 of BIS Rules, 2018. 
The scope of work of a Sectional Committee shall be defined by the Division Council. Any 
change in scope shall be approved by the Division Council. 
Each Division Council shall have an adequate number of Sectional Committees to ensure that 
a Sectional Committee is available for specific and well defined field of work, and that these 
committees have sufficient potential for standardization work to be carried out within the scope 
of Division Council concerned. 
In order to keep committees to a workable size, the strength of the Sectional Committee should 
normally be restricted to around 30.  
As far as possible, non-industry representation should not be less than two-third of the 
committee composition.

--- Page 20 ---
10 
 
The provision regarding term of the Sectional Committees, Subcommittees, Panels and 
Working Groups is given under Rule 19 of BIS Rules, 2018. 
7.5.4 Subcommittees 
 
Wherever required, subcommittees shall be set up by Sectional Committees. The scope of work 
of a subcommittee is defined by the parent Sectional Committee. Subcommittees are normally 
created to deal with specific but well defined area of work covered under the scope of the parent 
Sectional Committee. The relevance/need for the Subcommittee may be reviewed from time to 
time.  
 
7.5.5 Panels 
 
Panels are set up by Sectional Committees to deal with standardization work on a specific topic 
(a standard or a group of related standards) and within a specified time involving a small group 
of subject experts. Composition of Panels are therefore defined by the names of individual 
experts and not that of the organizations they may otherwise be representing. Panels, where 
necessary, may also be constituted under a Division Council or a Subcommittee. 
These are deemed to be ad-hoc in nature and may be disbanded on completion of the task 
assigned. A panel reports to the parent Subcommittee, Sectional Committee or Division 
Council which constituted it. The need for maintaining balance of representation of all 
interests shall therefore not apply in case of panels. The Convener of the panel is appointed 
by the parent committee which constitutes it. The Convener normally assumes the 
responsibility of the secretariat of the Panel. There is no term of appointment in the case of 
conveners. 
Provision of Panel is covered under Rule 18 and 19 of BIS Rules, 2018. 
 
7.5.6 Working Groups 
 
Working Groups are similar in constitution to Panels and may set up by a Sectional Committee, 
Subcommittee or a Panel to deal with specific and time bound tasks related to a standard(s). 
The process of appointment of Conveners is similar to that of a Panel. Provision of working 
groups is covered under Rule 18 and 19 of BIS Rules, 2018. 
 
7.6 Liaison among Sectional Committees 
 
Liaison shall be established where appropriate, with Sectional Committees within the same or 
under different Division Councils where the work of the committee is significantly relevant to 
activity of other committee(s). The committees in liaison with each other may keep track of the 
work of these committees and coordinate as may be required.  
 
A similar liaison would also be necessary with relevant technical committees of international

--- Page 21 ---
11 
 
standards bodies like ISO and IEC and shall be ensured by each Sectional Committee. 
 
7.7 Chairs of Technical Committees 
 
7.7.1 Appointment of Chairperson of Division Council/Sectional Committee 
 
Chairperson of a Division Council shall be a person of eminence/repute by virtue of his/her 
contribution in the field and/or holding key position in his/her organization and shall be from 
the related discipline. The term of appointment/reappointment of a Chairperson of a Divisional 
Council shall be 3 years. Chairperson of any Division Council should normally not hold the post 
for more than three consecutive terms. The appointment of a Chairperson of a Sectional 
Committee is also on similar terms. 
 
The Chairperson of a Division Council is appointed by the Standards Advisory Committee 
(delegated powers of the Governing Council). The Chairperson of a Sectional Committee is 
appointed by the Division Council. Formal concurrence of the appointed Chairperson shall be 
obtained while informing his/her appointment/reappointment. Where necessary, Chairperson 
may also be appointed by designation. Chairperson desiring to relinquish his/her position and 
a Chairperson completing his/her term shall continue to hold office till such time a new 
Chairperson is appointed by the Standards Advisory Committee or the concerned Division 
Council, as the case may be.  
 
Wherever required, a notable/experienced/senior expert from among the Sectional Committee 
members representing any other stakeholder (preferably from a stakeholder interest group 
different from that of the chairperson) may be designated as Vice-chairperson of the Sectional 
Committee by the Division Council. 
 
The Vice-chairperson of Sectional Committee will assist the Chairperson in performing the 
duties and responsibilities. The Vice-chairperson shall also perform the role of the acting 
Chairperson when the Chairperson is absent and/or unable to carry out his role and 
responsibilities due to some compelling reasons. 
 
7.7.2 Role of Chairperson 
 
The Chairperson shall preside over the Council/Sectional Committee meetings and guide the 
deliberations. The Chairperson is responsible for the overall management of the standardization 
work undertaken. The Chairperson has to ensure that all points of view expressed in 
deliberations/ discussions are taken into account before decisions are taken. The Chairperson 
has to therefore act in an impartial manner, divesting himself/herself of the point of view of the 
organization he/she may represent. Role of Chairperson of a Sectional Committee is described 
in Annex B which may be shared with all newly appointed Chairs.

--- Page 22 ---
12 
 
7.8 Appointment of Members of Technical Committees 
 
Each technical committee should comprise various stakeholder interests, ensuring a balanced 
representation of such interests. The number of members in each stakeholder category may 
vary depending on the scope of work of the committee.  
Members appointed in committees shall submit the nomination of their respective 
representatives (Principal and Alternate) to BIS Secretariat in the prescribed form. An expert 
offered membership in his/her individual capacity shall similarly also submit his/her details in 
such prescribed form. In addition, organizations may also nominate a Young Professional 
representative as a second alternate member, provided he/she is of age 37 years or less. 
 
7.8.1 Criteria for Selection of Members 
 
 
a) The membership shall be given to the organizations which have legal entities in India. 
The member considered shall be engaged in work that is relevant to the scope of work 
of the committee and shall be based on the appropriate qualification, knowledge and/or 
experience in the relevant field/related subjects. 
b) Representation is offered to those organizations/experts who have interest in the 
standardization work, and are ready to voluntarily involve themselves. 
c) For organizations representing industry interests, preference shall be given to 
associations as against individual organizations. Further, all India associations shall be 
given preference over regional or state level associations. 
d) In the case of members in individual capacity, representation is offered only to those 
technologists/scientists/professionals from the field who have expertise in the relevant 
areas. 
e) Based on the subject under the scope of a committee, Government/Ministries and 
Departments and regulatory bodies, both Central and State Government, may be given 
representation. 
 
7.9 Review of Committee Composition 
 
The composition of committees shall be reviewed by the appointing authority annually, with a 
view to making such changes as may be considered necessary in order to make the committee 
more effective and fully representative of the interests concerned. Review shall consider the 
contribution of existing members, any request for representation received from others 
interested, need for additional representations, members who need to be dropped, etc. Members 
not participating in meetings and also otherwise not contributing by commenting on documents, 
are liable to be dropped in order to provide opportunity to other similar organizations/institutes 
that may be interested to participate and contribute to the standardization efforts. 
NOTE – It is desirable to have review of contribution of members in the work of the committee by the 
Member Secretary along with the Chairperson. This would be useful when reviewing the composition and 
the continuation of a member in the committee should be based on the member's contribution in the work 
of the committee. This shall also be a consideration in deciding as to whether expenses towards 
participation of a member should be funded by BIS following the approved procedures and guidelines.

--- Page 23 ---
13 
 
In the case of members from Government or regulatory bodies or organizations which are 
unique and need to be represented on the committee, their continuation in the committees may 
be considered despite lack of participation/contribution in order to maintain the right 
stakeholder balance in the committees and in interest of keeping them informed of all the 
developments. Head of the Technical Department/Member Secretary concerned may urge upon 
such organizations of the importance of their presence in the committees and of their 
participation and contribution. 
 
Regular follow-ups shall be made with non-participating members for ensuring their 
participation at Member Secretary and Head of the technical department level, and where 
necessary at the level of Activity Head/DDG concerned. 
 
7.10 Role of Technical Committee Members 
 
Members of BIS technical committees are expected to attend all committee meetings and 
contribute to its work by examining and commenting on circulated documents/published 
standards, providing technical inputs to standardization work, help in drafting of standards, 
proposing new subjects of work and participating in deliberations/discussions. 
 
Only the principal member and/or the alternate representative can attend the meetings. In case 
of inability of the principal as well as the alternate representatives to attend a particular meeting, 
they may nominate another representative to attend a particular meeting on their behalf, with 
prior intimation to BIS Secretariat. Members in individual capacity cannot nominate any 
alternate/representative to a meeting. 
 
The nominated representatives should be conscious of their role in standardization. When 
representing an organization, they shall be responsible for expressing their organizations’ 
views, rather than their individual views. They shall be responsible for keeping their 
organizations (including associations or institutes) informed of the work in progress and for 
framing organizational viewpoints on issues that are under consideration/discussion. Members 
in particular should ensure that the major comments or criticisms are brought to the committee 
as early as possible and not left to the final stages of all the documents under development. 
 
Members should not withhold or misrepresent facts pertinent to, or provide wrong or 
misleading information, with regard to subjects under discussion/consideration in the 
Committee. 
 
Members are required to be familiar with the procedures for formulation of standards. It is their 
responsibility to carry out specific tasks as assigned to them by the committee and/or its 
Chairperson. Members shall be encouraged to therefore familiarize themselves with the 
principles and processes of standardization and committee procedures and to undergo trainings 
provided by BIS in this regard (see also 7.11).

--- Page 24 ---
14 
 
Participation in national standardization work is voluntary and all expenses related to 
participation in this activity are to be borne by the member (organization or individual). BIS 
may however bear the travel related expenses of eligible members as provided in BIS Rules, 
2018 (see Rule 20) and guidelines issued on the subject from time to time. Where necessary, 
BIS shall also endeavour to provide necessary assistance in terms of secretariat support to 
Chairs and conveners and to individual experts involved in drafting documents. 
 
Though comments on documents at any stage as well as on printed Indian Standards are 
welcome at all times, members should send them well in advance for inclusion in the agenda 
of the meeting of the committee in order to consider them in a meeting. Comments received 
very late or brought along for tabling during the meeting will be liable not to be considered as 
other members have not had the opportunity to deliberate these within their organization on 
these comments, form their viewpoint and are therefore unable to put forth their views at a 
short notice. 
 
Members shall register in Standards Portal of BIS and utilize this platform for accessing 
information and documents related to their committee work for commenting on drafts and 
published standards, for submitting proposals for new area/subject of work, for communicating 
with BIS Secretariat, etc; and correspondences through email and/or post for any such purpose 
is discouraged. 
 
Members joining a BIS technical committee shall be made aware of their roles and 
responsibilities provided in the ‘Guidelines for Participation in BIS Technical Committee Work’ 
(see Annex C). Members of technical committees shall also accept and abide by the Code of 
Ethics (see Annex D). 
 
7.11 Training of Technical Committee Members and Chairs 
 
All members and chairs of technical committees shall be offered training on standardization 
principles, best practices, BIS Act and Rules that govern the formulation of Indian Standards, 
standard formulation processes and procedures, concepts of harmonization, drafting of 
documents, international standardization and participation in international standardization 
work, etc. The objective of such training would be to sensitize them on standards setting process 
and latest developments therein, the roles and responsibilities and for their capacity building 
so that they are able to effectively participate and contribute to the committee work. 
7.12 Terms and Conditions for Engaging Consultants 
 
Rule 21 of BIS Rules, 2018 provides for appointment of consultants to assist the committees. 
As provided in Rule 7(5), the terms and conditions for engaging consultants to assist 
committees shall be as decided by the Executive Committee of BIS. The Guidelines approved 
by the Executive Committee of BIS in this regard may be referred to.

--- Page 25 ---
15 
 
Consultants may be involved in providing support to committees in the following areas: 
 
a) Review of existing 
standards leading to, where 
required, their timely 
revision/amendments to update the same as per the latest technological developments. 
b) Collection of information/data on state-of-the-art in the country and best practices world 
over and assist in preparation of draft revision of existing and formulation of standards 
in new areas. 
c) Involve in strategic initiatives for wide publicity and effective implementation of 
standards. 
d) Interact and work coherently with government departments, industry associations, 
professional institutions, academic institutions, etc for their inputs for standardization 
work and for promotion of use of standards. 
e) Technical editing of draft standards/other publications for ensuring their error-free and 
quality publication. 
 
7.13 Member Secretary 
7.13.1 General 
 
Rule 17(2) of BIS Rules, 2018 provides that an officer of the Bureau shall be the Member 
Secretary of a Sectional Committee.  
 
The BIS officer who acts as the Member Secretary of a technical committee is expected to play 
a full part in its technical work while providing secretariat support to the committee. Member 
Secretary is to function as the guiding force to undertake and achieve work for BIS through the 
forum provided by technical committees. It is essentially his/her vision to determine what 
useful work should be done by his/her committee and its timeliness and also keep the work-load 
at an optimum level (neither too heavy, causing bottlenecks nor too little, causing disinterest 
and indifference in the minds of committee members and organizations). Therefore, it is 
advisable for the Member Secretary to plan the work-load and work content for at least three 
years in accordance with the standardization needs determined and the plan framed by the 
concerned committee. While doing so, he/she must anticipate technological, industrial and 
economic trends and collect necessary facts, figures, information and other materials. He/she 
should have a clear understanding of the strategic imperatives while planning the 
standardization work and anticipate and factor in any risk associated with his work while 
planning. He/she would be guided in this by such standardization strategies defined by BIS, 
the Strategic Road Map of the relevant Division Council and the Standardization Plan framed 
by the Sectional Committee of which he is the Member Secretary. One of the major tasks of 
the Member Secretary is to assess the implementation status of published standards and plan 
their review/revision as required. In this task, the upgradation of the content of standards, 
desirably to international level would be the main objective. The Member Secretary shall work 
in close liaison with the Chairperson of the Sectional Committee and the Conveners of 
Subcommittees, Panels and Working Groups.

--- Page 26 ---
16 
 
7.13.2  Roles and Responsibilities of Member Secretary  
 
The Member Secretary is especially responsible for, 
a) preparing a comprehensive Annual Action Plan (AAP) covering each of the projects 
for revision of standards and formulation of standards on new subjects giving project 
timelines, and tracking the progress of each of such projects for accomplishing stage-
wise progress leading to timely publication of standards; 
b) scheduling meetings (preparing annual schedule) in alignment with the Annual Action 
Plan and organizing meetings in time; 
c) organizing meetings frequently to keep committee active and help sustain the interest 
of the members, while ensuring quick decisions on all relevant matters; 
d) preparation of committee drafts, arranging their circulation and treatment of the 
comments received; 
e) scrutinizing new proposals for standards development by evaluating these to establish 
the need for standardization for further consideration of the technical committee; 
f) avoiding taking up standardization in areas falling in the domain of other technical 
departments or of other committees within the same department; 
g) ensuring a thorough evidence-based review of standards due for periodic review and 
where required revise the standard reflecting the state-of-the-art and considering the 
latest technological developments globally using Action Research approach through 
Review Module of BIS Standardization Portal; 
h) preparation for meetings including, 
1) Preparation of agenda and arranging for its circulation, 
2) Circulation of all documents on the agenda, and 
3) Compilation of comments and observations on documents/published standards 
which appear on the agenda; 
j) recording of decisions taken in the meeting; 
k) preparation of the minutes of meeting and arranging for its circulation; 
m) assist the technical committee/individual members in preparation of draft standards; 
n) examining, editing and preparing the draft standards at different stages, namely, 
Working/Preliminary Draft, Wide Circulation Draft and Finalized Draft taking care of 
technical aspects as well as editorial aspects as per IS 12 ‘Guide for Drafting and 
Presentation of Indian Standards’; 
p) ensuring that the manuscript of F-copy of the draft processed for publication is 
completely edited as per IS 12, has all tables, figures, maps and composition of 
technical committees, has correct Hindi title as well as ICS No., etc and in case of 
revision of a standard, the major modifications are duly enlisted in the Foreword; 
q) checking the entire edited copy as well as the proofs received from Publication 
Department, carefully, including for placement of tables, figures, maps, annexes, etc; 
their cross-referencing; and particularly the formulae, equations, etc, so as to avoid any 
error being crept in at these stages. The edited copy/proof should be returned by the

--- Page 27 ---
17 
 
Technical Departments to Publication Department within a week’s time; 
r) processing the final standard after being adopted by the Chairperson of the Division                        
Council, to Publication Department for gazette notification, quickly. In case of revision 
of a standard, the revised standard supersedes the earlier version of the standard giving 
some time for their concurrent running. However, in some cases, a revised (or a new 
standard) may supersede one or more standards as well, which might have been 
amalgamated with such published standard or otherwise. Care should be taken to 
appropriately reflect these in the gazette notification correctly; 
s) implementation of decisions taken by the committee; 
t) maintaining a comprehensive database of stakeholders to enable circulation of draft 
standards during wide circulation stage; 
u) coordination with standards work in related fields and collection of information from 
various sources (for example, foreign standards, company specifications, technical 
literature, published papers and books, etc); 
w) feeding the committee with technical data, information on overseas standards etc with 
a view to upgradation of technological levels progressively to international standards; 
y) guiding the committee on the standardization principles and practices adopted by BIS 
and International Standard bodies; 
z) updating of Programme of Work on BIS Website/Standardization Portal; 
aa) coordination with other technical committee/BIS technical departments whose work is 
significantly relevant to the activities of the committee; 
bb) coordination related to BIS’s/India’s participation in technical committees of 
international standardization and regional standardization bodies; 
cc) liaison with external organization/committees related or relevant to the activities of the 
Committees; 
dd) evaluation of contribution made by technical committee members in committee work 
for the purpose of recognizing their contribution; 
ee) coordinate standards promotion efforts through seminars/workshops/conferences/ 
webinars and other means and coordinate with consumer interests, various government 
departments, industry associations, educational institutions, etc in order to promote 
implementation of standards; 
ff) responsibility for representation on external committees and vice-versa and 
participation in their meetings; 
gg) functioning as spokesman for the committee along with its Chairperson; 
hh) ensuring the composition of the committee is balanced with representatives from all 
concerned interest and important domains as per the scope of the committee; 
jj) comprehensively reviewing the composition in meetings with a view to keeping it updated with 
right organizations represented keeping in view the dynamic nature of subjects of 
standardization taken up and level of participation by the members; 
kk) sending prompt communications to head of the organizations/coordinating official of those 
members who have not been participating in meetings and also not contributing otherwise to 
ensure active participation and review of their nominations, if required;

--- Page 28 ---
18 
 
mm) Scrutiny of requests received for representation in committees, evaluating vacancies likely in a 
committee and proposing new members that may be considered for representation to the 
committee; 
nn) ensuring that the composition is updated in the Standardization Portal on real-time basis with 
complete details of the members, namely name/designation, postal address, E-mail ID and phone 
number; 
pp) keeping the members (particularly new nominees) updated about the Standardization Portal and 
providing necessary assistance to them; 
qq) nominating the members for undergoing BIS trainings for technical committee members for 
helping in their capacity building leading to more effective contribution; and 
rr) nominating technical committees and their Chairpersons and members for award of recognition 
to them for their outstanding contribution. 
 
7.13.3 Liaison with External Committees and Organizations 
 
Since standardization work assists or influences the functioning of a large number of 
organizations in the country, it is expected that they would deal with matters which affect or are 
closely related to BIS work, either departmentally or through committees and other consultative 
mechanisms. It is for the Member Secretary to be aware of such activities in the other bodies 
and to use their existence for strengthening and disseminating work. He/she could also use their 
activities as an input to BIS committee work. These objectives can be achieved by a variety of 
strategies, like giving them representation in BIS Committees; getting representation to BIS on 
their committees; and organizing joint events on standards, participation in meetings, 
conferences, etc organized by them and vice-versa. 
 
7.13.4 Content and Drafting of Standards 
 
7.13.4.1 Principles 
 
It is very important that the standard is drafted in such a manner that it fulfils the purpose set 
out in 3.2 and that it provides the same interpretation and understanding of its provisions across 
all users of the standard. For this, the standard should be well drafted in clear and unambiguous 
manner with appropriate content and language for its intended use, comprehensively 
addressing all details relevant to its scope and application, containing provisions that are not 
unduly restrictive and that are able to support any claims of compliance, and consistent with 
relevant legal and statutory provisions. 
 
7.13.4.2 Rules of drafting 
 
The rules of drafting are governed by the provisions of IS 12 which comprehensively addresses 
the form, structure and conventions in presentation to be followed. This provides the Indian 
Standards a distinct identity. It should be the endeavour of those drafting standards to follow 
these drafting guidelines from the very beginning of the drafting process which can save 
valuable time and effort in editing of documents at the later stages.

--- Page 29 ---
19 
 
7.13.4.3 Particular attention is drawn to the following: 
 
a) Language – Standards are technical documents, generally intended for use by persons 
who are conversant with the relevant technical terms and language. Every effort shall 
be made to keep the language of a standard clear and concise. Use of plain and simple 
English, free of jargon, to explain the subject of a standard is always recommended. 
Any textual and technical ambiguities shall be removed and consistency between the 
text, tables, formulae and figures in a standard ensured. There must be clarity on what 
is intended to be expressed, that is, whether it is a requirement, a recommendation, an 
instruction, a permission, or an expression of capability or an information, in order to 
choose the right verb form. Use of the most appropriate language enables ease and 
clarity in understanding and uniform interpretation, and avoidance of the possibility of 
incorrect application of instructions. 
 
b) Structure and content of a standard – Documents should be focused and concise and 
within the scope of the standard. It is worthwhile to consider splitting a standard into 
parts as this may sometimes facilitate development, implementation and revision of the 
document. 
 
c) Reference to legislation – It is permissible to make a reference to applicable legislation 
when such reference would be helpful in applying the standard (generally referred in 
the Foreword of a standard). However, standards need not contain provisions that are 
already requirements of regulation/legislation, nor to contain any statement requiring 
compliance with such regulation/legislation. 
 
7.13.5 Attributes for Efficient Functioning of Member Secretary 
 
The following would contribute to efficient functioning of the Member Secretary; 
 
a) Full familiarity with the BIS Act, Rules and Regulations; awareness about the overall 
policies of BIS in relation to standards development work and also about directives of 
the top management of BIS. 
b) Being in position to advise the committee on any point of procedure or drafting. 
c) Familiarity with the subjects dealt with by the committees handled by him/her in respect 
of economic data, national priorities, technological status of the industry in India and 
abroad, availability of standards in India and outside, any national regulations, laws, 
etc. 
d) Awareness of testing facilities in the country and of R&D work going on. 
e) Awareness of any decision by higher level bodies in BIS such as Governing Council, 
Executive Committee, Standards Advisory Committee (SAC) and Division Council 
regarding the activities of the Sectional Committee for which he/she is responsible. 
f) 
Awareness of the work accomplished and in hand with other related BIS technical 
committees. 
g) Awareness of the international standards/foreign standards in relevant subjects and the

--- Page 30 ---
20 
 
ongoing work in international and regional standardization bodies. 
h) Capacity to organize and independently carry out technical and administrative work of 
the committee and to influence and promote active participation on the part of the 
committee members. 
j) 
Command of language and clarity of expression. 
k) Command over editorial practices as per IS 12. 
m) Ability to communicate with and build rapport with committee members and other 
stakeholders so as to ensure required inputs and smooth functioning of the 
committee(s). 
 
NOTES 
1 The Member Secretary may arrange to give electronic access to standards dealt by the committee 
members but not freely accessible, on his/her request with the watermark of the member’s name 
and committee number and date of issue marked on each page with copyright conditions. 
2 A list of possible documents that may be required by the Member Secretary for frequent reference 
is given in Annex E. 
 
8 DEVELOPMENT OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
 
8.1 Principles 
 
The principles underpinning the development of Indian Standards are set out here and are 
discussed in detail. Standards are formulated through a process that progressively builds 
consensus on the contents of a document, through involvement of subject experts representing 
various stakeholders in technical committees and finally a national consensus through public 
commenting and resolution of comments received. Indian Standards are developed to meet the 
particular needs in India. However, efforts are there to align these with the International 
Standards of ISO/IEC available on the subject or with such other globally accepted standards of 
other SDOs. Indian Standards can therefore be adoptions of ISO or IEC standards (by virtue of 
BIS being members of these international standards bodies) or adoptions of standards of any 
other SDO subject to agreement with such bodies. The principles of development of both types 
of documents are broadly similar, but there are some procedural differences which are 
appropriately covered in the relevant clauses hereunder. 
 
It is very important that standards are developed in an efficient and timely manner so as to 
respond to the market needs in time and to also make judicious use of limited resources 
available for such purpose. Each and every standard is to be considered and managed as a 
project. It requires meticulous planning of the project development activities, including 
identification of stakeholders, project leaders/experts, expected date of publication, committee 
meetings, planning for resources required including of those involved in the process and the 
expectations of the committee/BIS, anticipating any associated risks and bottlenecks to 
preempt and address them, thereby reducing the possibility of any idle time between the stages 
of standards development, and timely development of standards. It is also important to ensure 
coordination with other technical committees related to the subject of the standard under

--- Page 31 ---
21 
 
development to ensure that there is coherence and any possible conflict or contradiction with 
other standards is avoided. 
 
As a principle, the decision to proceed from one stage to another in the standards development 
should be taken in a Sectional Committee meeting. In rare situations that may warrant an urgent 
decision not permitting the time required to convene a meeting, such decisions may also be 
taken through correspondence. (see also Note 3 of Table 2) 
 
The procedure for establishment of Indian Standards is prescribed under Rule 22 of BIS Rules, 
2018. 
 
8.2 Stages of Development 
 
8.2.1 General 
 
The Secretariat of Sectional Committee is responsible for the management of all standards 
development work identified in the work programme of that Sectional Committee, including 
monitoring of their progress against the agreed target dates. 
 
Table 1 shows the sequence of stages through which the technical work is carried out and a 
standard is developed along with the name of the document associated with each stage. 
 
Table 1 
Stages and Associated Documents 
(Clause 8.2.1) 
Stage 
Associated document 
           Name 
Abbreviation 
Proposal stage 
New work item proposal 
NWIP 
Preparatory stage 
Working draft 
WD 
Committee stage 
Preliminary draft 
P 
Approval stage 
Wide circulation draft 
WC 
Publication stage 
National Standard 
IS/SP 
 
Under specific situations encountered during the development process of a standard as given 
below, it is possible to skip a particular stage or stages: 
 
a) 
The preparatory stage, in cases where a suitable draft is available for circulation as                
P Draft. 
b) 
The committee stage, in cases where the working draft itself is suitable for circulation 
as wide circulation draft.

--- Page 32 ---
22 
 
c) 
Both preparatory and committee stages, in cases where an existing standard from 
another source (Example - ISO/IEC) is agreed to be considered for wide circulation 
for approval as an Indian Standard. 
d) 
The approval stage, in cases where the Sectional Committee (through meeting or 
correspondence) finalizes a document waiving the WC stage (when the matter is 
urgent or non-controversial) or in cases where a committee decides on publication of 
a document as a Provisional Standard [see Rule 22(4) of BIS Rules, 2018]. 
 
8.2.2 Programme of Work 
 
The work programme of sectional committees is guided by the strategic imperatives defined 
by the respective Division Council. The business environment, sector specific policy 
imperatives, the technological advancements, etc determines the strategic considerations of 
standardization in a particular sector/technology area. 
 
To anticipate the future work to be taken up, the Sectional Committee shall draw inputs from 
Government policies and directives, relevant reports of  NITI Aayog, trade perspectives, 
technological developments in the field, research projects of R&D institutions in the field, 
stakeholder feedbacks on standards or feedbacks from seminars/workshops or other 
stakeholder outreach programmes, standardization work of other international/regional/other 
national bodies, activities of regulatory bodies, proposals for new subjects received, etc. Inputs 
shall also be drawn from directives of the Governing Council, Executive Committee, Standards 
Advisory Committee as well as the strategic directions of the Division Council. Any work 
undertaken shall be within the agreed scope of the Sectional Committee and in accordance with 
the policy objectives and resources of BIS. 
 
Sectional Committees shall have a work programme termed ‘Programme of Work’ which shall 
be reviewed regularly. The Member Secretary of the committee plays a critical role in 
anchoring the work programme by providing the right direction to the work through proper 
planning and execution with the inputs of members. 
 
The Programme of Work of each Sectional Committee shall be in the public domain on BIS 
website (a requirement of the WTO-TBT Code of Good Practices). The Programme of Work 
shall consist of the following information: 
 
a) Scope of the Sectional Committee; 
b) Liaison with other committees (International and other BIS technical committees); 
c) List of published standards with their reaffirmation year and no. of amendments, etc; 
d) New subject proposals approved; and 
e) Draft standards under formulation (New subjects/Revisions) and draft amendments, 
under different stages as under: 
1) Preliminary draft standards/amendments; 
2) Draft standards/amendments in wide circulation; 
3) Draft standards/amendments completed wide circulation;

--- Page 33 ---
23 
 
4) Draft standards/amendments finalized but not yet under publication; and 
5) Finalized draft standards/amendments under publication. 
 
 
8.2.3 Proposal Stage 
 
As provided in Rule 22(1) of BIS Rule, 2018, requests for new Indian Standards or revision or 
amendment to existing standards may come from any Ministry of Central Government, State 
Government, Union Territory Administrations, regulatory bodies, consumer organizations, 
industrial units, industry associations, professional bodies, members of Bureau, any individual 
and members of a BIS technical committee.  
The proposal for a new subject (development of a new standard) shall be submitted online on 
Standards Portal giving relevant information (any proposal received by email/post shall be 
entered in the online system by BIS Secretariat or the proposer advised to do so). On registering 
a proposal online, the system shall assign a number to it. A proposer is expected to be able to 
demonstrate a broad need for the proposed standard, that the work is likely to have the 
participation/support of a wide range of stakeholder interests, that resources are likely to be 
available to provide an initial draft, that the project can be completed in reasonable time and 
that there is no conflict with any existing standard. 
The proposal shall be analysed by the Member Secretary before placing this for consideration 
of the Sectional Committee. The analysis would cover the following aspects, prepared in the 
prescribed format (see Annex F): 
a) Futuristic developments (such as national priority/policy imperatives of Government, 
bearing on Government legislation/ regulations, technology up-gradation/ transfer, 
harmonization 
with 
international 
standards/practices, 
addressing 
gaps 
in 
standardization and supporting upscaling of innovation); 
b) Economic importance (such as domestic trade, export potential/import substitution, 
variety reduction, resource conservation and energy conservation, circular economy;  
c) Social importance (such as health, safety, for weaker sections/disadvantaged groups, 
mass consumption, environment protection/waste utilization, consumer protection, 
accessibility and gender responsiveness, etc); 
d) Contribution to sustainability including UN SDGs; and  
e) Others (such as implementablity/certifiablity and any other aspect). 
 
The proposal stage would not apply in the case of a revision of an Indian Standard. 
 
If the subject-matter of the proposed standard does not fall within the scope of work of any of 
the existing Sectional Committees, it shall be referred to the Division Council the scope of 
which is close to the subject under consideration, which shall then decide on a Sectional 
Committee from any of the existing sectional committees to allot the subject or shall create a 
new sectional committee, if required.

--- Page 34 ---
24 
 
8.2.3.1 Approval of subjects 
 
The Sectional Committee shall analyse the proposal during a meeting along with the 
assessment made by the Member Secretary. The Sectional Committee shall, considering such 
analysis, arrive at a decision as to whether the subject would be taken up for standardization 
and if so, the priority/time-frame to be assigned. A subject accepted by the Sectional Committee 
shall be thereafter placed in the Division Council for approval. In order to avoid any delay in 
the project, the Sectional Committee shall, however, proceed with the development of the 
standard without awaiting the formal approval of the Division Council. In case the Division 
Council feels it appropriate to disapprove a subject proposal, the Sectional Committee shall 
forthwith withhold further work on the proposed subject. It is however, the responsibility of 
the Sectional Committee and its Member Secretary to ensure that subjects taken up has the 
approval of the Division Council by the time such subjects progress to the finalization stage of 
a standard. 
When a proposal is rejected by the Sectional Committee/Division Council, the proposer shall 
be informed of the decision [see Rule 22(3) of BIS Rules, 2018]. 
 
8.2.3.2 Prioritization of work 
 
While approving a new subject, the Sectional Committee shall also assign the priority to the 
subject to determine the timeline for completing the project. The reasonable timescale for 
completion of a project will vary according to its complexity, the volume of work involved and 
the extent of consensus that needs to be established. Proposals that are urgent in nature and 
directed by the Government shall be taken up as high priority subjects. Proposals involving 
voluminous work, or on complex subjects, involving specific studies or research or validation, 
where wider consultations may be necessary and therefore likely to require more time should 
be taken up as Priority III subjects. Subjects that do not fall under any of the above two 
categories should be considered as normal and taken up as Priority II subject. Important but 
very voluminous work (such as handbooks, Special Publications like National Building Code, 
National Electric Code, National Lighting Code, etc) which involves additional effort and are 
not likely to be completed in the schedule specified for Priority I, II or III, may be termed as 
special projects with the approval of the Activity Head/DDG concerned. Where feasible, such 
work may be taken up in smaller parts and each part published separately so that the work gets 
expedited. The timeframes stipulated under Priority I, II or III are the standard development 
times and indicative of the upper limits of the time schedule. Wherever required and 
appropriate, Sectional Committees while approving a new subject/revision project may decide 
for a shorter timeline. In such case the Sectional Committee shall also decide on the timelines 
of each of the stages of standards development.  
The time norms given in Table 2 shall be followed in development of a standard.

--- Page 35 ---
25 
 
Table 2 Guidelines for Time Schedule for Standards Formulation Stages 
 (Indigenous Indian Standards and Adopted ISO/IEC standard) 
(Clause 8.1, 8.2.3.2 and 8.2.4) 
 
Sl 
No. 
Stage Details 
Expected Time in Weeks 
 
 
Priority I 
Priority II 
Priority III 
 
 
Indigenous 
standard 
 
Adoption 
of 
ISO/IEC 
standard 
Indigenous 
standard 
 
Adoption 
of 
ISO/IEC 
standard 
Indigenous 
standard 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
i) 
Committee 
Stage 
Availability of P 
Draft to 
approval for 
WC 
12 
- 
20 
- 
30 
ii) 
   Approval Stage 
 
 
Approval for 
WC Draft to 
circulation of 
WC 
4 
4 
8 
8 
8 
iii) 
Circulation of 
WC Draft to 
finalization by 
committee 
8 
8 
20 
12 
24 
iv) 
Publication Stage 
 
Finalization of 
the Draft to 
sending of 
manuscript to 
Publication 
4 
4 
12 
8 
20 
v) 
Sending of 
manuscript to 
Publication till 
the publication 
of standard 
8 
8 
12 
8 
14 
  
Total time 
 
36 Weeks/ 
9 Months 
 
24 Weeks/ 
6 Months 
 
72 Weeks/    
18 Months 
 
36 Weeks/ 
9 Months 
 
96 Weeks/   
24 Months 
 
NOTES 
1 The above timelines are flexible in the sense that a Sectional Committee may decide on a shorter timeframe 
under an assigned Priority.  
2 Normal process involves at least two committee meetings, one for approval of the draft for Wide

--- Page 36 ---
26 
 
Circulation and other for finalization after completion of the Wide Circulation. 
3 Subjects identified to be published as adoption of other standards (a Dual Number standard) shall be issued 
directly into wide circulation. To further expedite the process, if there is no comment on a wide circulation 
draft (of dual number standard), the draft should be considered as finalized and be processed for publication 
with the approval of the Sectional Committee through circulation. If consensus is not reached to adopt it as 
dual numbered, normal procedure shall be adopted. 
4 There may be flexibility of time norms at individual stages as long as overall time taken is under control. 
5 When a standard due to valid reasons cannot be formulated in the stipulated time, a proper justification 
should be prepared by the Sectional Committee. This shall be brought to the notice of the Technical 
Department Head and the Activity Head/concerned DDG by the Member Secretary. On such review the 
timeline may be revised. 
6 For conditions under which wide circulation of a document may be dispensed with is prescribed in 
8.2.1(d). 
 
8.2.4 Preparatory Stage 
 
The preparatory stage covers the preparation of a draft in accordance with the general principles 
and framework of a standard. The draft should be prepared in accordance with IS 12. The 
preparation of the first draft, called the Working draft, is normally assigned to a committee 
expert or a Panel or Working Group or taken up by the Member Secretary himself/herself. A 
separate list with a tentative number may be assigned to the document for example CED 03 
(XXXX)WD and a list thereof maintained in the department. 
The Working draft shall be modified to make it a Preliminary draft (P Draft) by the expert or 
Panel or Member Secretary by improving the document to fill any gaps observed. BIS 
Secretariat may provide necessary secretarial assistance to the individual experts or the Panel/ 
Working Group who have been assigned the task of developing the P Draft. 
P Draft so prepared shall be allotted a document number in the document database on the 
Standardization Portal. The document number shall be retained until the work on the project is 
completed unless its deletion has been agreed upon, such as in case of dropping the document 
by the Sectional Committee. The document number shall be indicated at the fourth cover page 
of the published standard. 
 
NOTE – Document number consists of three elements, 
a) The Sectional Committee number 
b) Document serial number allotted through the portal 
c) Stage of the draft document as ‘P’ for P Draft and ‘WC’ for Wide Circulation draft for 
example, TED 02(XXXXX)P 
 
The time schedule for a project for formulation of standards (as given in Table 2) shall start 
from the date the P Draft (or WC Draft in case the P Draft stage is waived off) is registered on 
the Standards Portal.  
 
While working on the preparation of a draft, the committee shall make endeavour to obtain, as 
applicable, information on the current manufacturing capability and manufacturing capacity in

--- Page 37 ---
27 
 
the country, the national and global trade figures, the major industries and their location and 
the geographical distribution, major R&D/scientific institutions relevant to the subject, the 
quality infrastructure particularly of testing laboratories and facilities available, and 
information on the users/potential users etc which would facilitate obtaining necessary 
standardization inputs, identify potential difficulties in implementation of the standard as well 
as the potential use/implementation of the standard.   
 
8.2.5 Committee Stage 
 
The P Draft shall be circulated to all members of the Sectional Committee and concerned 
Subcommittee(s) and Panel(s) for comments, with a clear indication of the last date for sending 
comments (not less than 2 weeks after circulation). It will be worthwhile to have a longer period 
of circulation, say of 1 month in case of documents of voluminous or complex nature. 
 
With the exception of drafts for wide circulation for comments, the documents issued to any 
BIS Committee are marked ‘For BIS use only’ as the contents are not used for any purpose 
other than the work of the committee. 
 
8.2.5.1 Review of comments 
 
Comments received on a P Draft shall be scrutinized and compiled by the Member Secretary 
concerned. He/she should also formulate, his/her recommendation on how each comment 
should be dealt with. The comments shall be disposed of by the expert or Panel/ Working Group 
(when assigned the preparation of the P Draft) or by the Subcommittee/Sectional Committee 
concerned. Comments so disposed of by an expert or Panel/ Working Group shall be reviewed 
by the Sectional Committee for a decision on the same. 
 
The decisions for disposal of various comments and to approve the P Draft as wide circulation 
draft (WC Draft) shall be taken by the Sectional Committee (where applicable on the 
recommendation of its subcommittee or panel) on the basis of the consensus principle. All 
efforts shall be made by the Member Secretary and the Chairperson that the decisions are taken 
based on general agreement of all the members present during the meeting, resolving any 
difference of opinion. However, isolated cases of difference of opinion may be recorded. 
   
  NOTE – In case of recirculation of such document, the second circulation shall bear the number as CED 
02(XXXXX)WD2. This also applies to P Draft and WC Draft.  
 
A Working draft which has been circulated to committee members and on which no technical 
comment or only editorial comments have been received, may be considered as the P Draft and 
can proceed to the next stage, that is for wide circulation with the approval of the Sectional 
Committee. Such approval may be taken through correspondence or in a meeting of the 
committee. 
 
In case there are technical comments on Working drafts/Preliminary drafts, these shall be

--- Page 38 ---
28 
 
discussed in a meeting of the Sectional Committee for approval to proceed to the next stage 
(WC Draft). In case of Priority I projects such approval may be taken through correspondence, 
after resolving the comments through the concerned appointed subordinate committee/expert. 
 
NOTE – Revision of existing standards are normally taken up directly for wide circulation. However, in case 
of extensive and/or complex changes being involved and as decided by the Sectional Committee, revision 
drafts may also be processed from the P Draft stage. 
 
8.2.6 Approval Stage 
 
Consultation on a draft standard is based on the following principles: 
 
a) A draft standard is normally open for public comment irrespective of its national or 
international origin. 
b) The consultative procedure is normally applied once only. 
c) In case of drafts based on international work, the result of consultation is used to guide 
both the India vote on the international standard and the acceptability of the draft as 
Indian Standard 
d) Draft amendments affecting the technical content of published standards are normally 
also made available for public comments. 
 
WC Draft, apart from the members of concerned technical committee shall be circulated to all 
those who may be interested and are expected to contribute as identified under the signature of 
the departmental head. The period of circulation shall be determined by the committee 
concerned which should be 60 days (see Annex 3 of WTO-TBT Agreement) but not less than one 
month [see Rule 22(4) of BIS Rules, 2018] and hosted on BIS website for free access to the 
public for comments. For draft Indian Standards identical to ISO/IEC standards, only the 
national foreword (along with other details from the standard as made available gratis by 
ISO/IEC in their website) is to be hosted on BIS website and the full text of the standard made 
available to stakeholders on receiving specific requests only. A WC Draft shall indicate the ICS 
Number of the subject. 
 
WC drafts may be specifically circulated to the following stakeholders for their comments, as 
applicable, for which committee-wise or subject-wise list/database of stakeholders shall be 
maintained by the Member Secretary: 
 
a) Key producers; 
b) Key users/consumers, civil society organizations/NGOs; 
c) Key technologists (professional bodies, R&D and scientific institutions, academia, testing and 
calibration laboratories, etc); 
d) Central and State Government departments likely to be interested; 
e) Members of the Sectional Committee, members of the concerned Subcommittee(s) and 
Panel(s)/Working Group(s); 
f) Members of the Division Council which has appointed the Sectional Committee; and 
g) Members of the other Sectional Committee(s), Subcommittee(s) and Panel(s) with whom 
liaison is felt necessary.

--- Page 39 ---
29 
 
The list of stakeholders shall be reviewed by the Member Secretary from time to time, for 
updation. 
 
NOTE – The drafts for standards under certification and their test methods shall also be circulated to the 
Laboratories, Technical Departments, Central Marks Department, Regional and Branch Offices and other 
concerned departments of BIS. 
 
Comments received on a WC Draft shall be disposed of in a manner similar to what has been 
described for P Drafts. 
 
Where comments reveal a lack of general consensus as to the state-of-the-art, the Sectional 
Committee should reconsider the usefulness and scope of the standard or, in exceptional cases, 
consider the possibility of publishing it as a Provisional Standard subject to provisions given 
in Rule 27 of BIS Rules, 2018.  
 
If the content and/or structure of a document is substantially changed as a result of comments 
received, a second WC Draft for public comment may be considered, if so decided by the 
committee. 
 
Comments received are not normally acknowledged. Desirability of inviting commentators 
having substantial comments, who are not members of the Sectional Committee, can be 
considered in consultation with the Chairperson of the Sectional Committee. 
 
8.2.6.1 Waiving off wide circulation 
 
As prescribed in Rule 22(4) of BIS Rules, 2018, if a Sectional Committee considers that the 
subject matter of the draft standard/amendment is non-controversial in nature or the need for 
the standard/amendment is urgent, it may decide to dispense with wide circulation. Possible 
implications of such measures should be kept into consideration while arriving at the decision 
and it should be supported by adequate justification. 
 
NOTE – This shall be considered as an exception and not as a routine and the provision applied with utmost 
care and restraint. 
 
8.2.7 Finalization of Draft Standard 
 
The Sectional Committee after considering all comments on the circulated draft finalizes the 
draft standard with or without changes. A decision to finalize and adopt a draft Indian Standard 
as an Indian Standard is taken following the principle of consensus. 
 
NOTES 
1 The decision to finalize a document should be taken in a meeting of the Sectional Committee and decision 
through a process of circulation is not recommended and should be avoided. 
2 The Sectional Committee/Member Secretary shall ensure that the subject of a new standard has the formal 
approval of the concerned Division Council when considering finalization of a draft standard for 
publication.

--- Page 40 ---
30 
 
8.2.8 Maintaining Progress 
 
a) BIS strives to formulate standards as quickly as possible. 
b) Members have to ensure discipline with respect to deadlines and time lines assigned for 
completion of each stage in order to avoid long and uncertain periods of ‘dead time’. 
Similarly, to avoid re-discussion, members have the responsibility of ensuring that their 
technical stand is established, taking account of all interests concerned at national level, 
and is made clear at an early stage. Members must recognize that substantial comments 
tabled at meetings are counterproductive since an opportunity is not available for other 
members to carry out the necessary consultations within their respective organizations, 
without which rapid achievement of consensus may be difficult. 
c) Matters that have been decided at an earlier meeting should not be reopened, unless the 
Chairperson decides that some new factor has arisen. A member who is the sole 
representative of an organization, missing a committee meeting and unhappy with a 
decision recorded in the minutes, should write to the Member Secretary without delay. 
The Chairperson may otherwise rule that it would be out of order to raise the matter at 
the next meeting. 
d) All active projects and pending subjects should be reviewed by the concerned Sectional 
Committee. If a subject has not progressed within the time norms recommended at any 
stage, the Sectional Committee may consider redefining the timelines or for dropping 
the subject, and recommend the same to the Division Council, in case of new subjects. 
 
8.2.9 Provisional Indian Standard 
 
A Provisional Indian Standard may be prepared as prescribed under Rule 27 of BIS Rules, 2018 
when urgently needed but its technical accuracy cannot be established on account of technology 
being new or not having been proven commercially. It is, however, advisable to avoid as far as 
possible, the issue of a provisional standard. 
 
The proposer as indicated in 8.2.3 may submit proposals to the Bureau for establishment of a 
provisional Indian Standard. The proposal shall normally be accompanied by a draft of the 
Provisional Indian Standard. 
 
The draft Provisional Indian Standard shall be processed as per the procedure indicated in 8.2.4 
and 8.2.5 for approval by the concerned Sectional Committee and issue of provisional standard, 
but without wide circulation, thereby implying that a Provisional Indian Standard is a limited 
consensus document. 
 
The Sectional Committee shall decide the period of validity of the Provisional Standard but this 
shall not exceed two years. The period of validity may be extended by not more than two years 
on a review by the Sectional Committee. 
The Foreword of the Provisional Indian Standard shall clearly bring out the following: 
a) Need for preparing the provisional standard,

--- Page 41 ---
31 
 
b) Scope of its application, and 
c) Period of validity. 
 
Before the expiry of the validity period, the Provisional Indian Standard shall be considered by 
the Sectional Committee for establishing it as a regular Indian Standard. If the Sectional 
Committee is not in favour of its establishment as a regular standard, the Provisional Indian 
Standard shall lapse after its validity period/extended validity period. 
 
The title of such standards shall incorporate the wording “Provisional Indian Standard”. The 
designation would be in the normal series of IS numbering with addition of the letter ‘P’ 
immediately after the IS designation number, before the colon separating the year of 
adoption/publication. 
 
The scope of such standards shall clearly bring out the fact that this standard under the ‘P’ 
series is not amenable for certification. The following statement shall be included in the 
Foreword of a Provisional Indian Standard to clarify the above: 
 
‘This standard is used as a provisional standard in order to enable collection of data on the 
prescribed requirements and to gain experience on the test methods, etc based on these before 
issuance of this standard as a regular Indian standard is considered. In view of this, 
certification of product as per this provisional standard would not be possible under the BIS 
Act. However, the standard is recommended for wider implementation by the concerned. 
 
When such a standard is confirmed this should be brought in normal series by amending the 
designation, that is, deleting the letter ‘P’. 
 
8.3 Adoption of Other Standards as Indian Standards 
 
Under provisions of Rule 29 of BIS Rules, 2018, the Bureau may, in relation to any goods, 
article, process, system or service, recognize any standard established by any other institution 
in India or outside as an Indian Standard with necessary modifications. Adoption of other 
standards as Indian Standard may be considered in order to avoid duplication of standardization 
work, aligning with global practices and requirements, or in ensuring harmonious development 
of standards within the country based on proposals received for the same from the body that 
has developed the standard, under the provisions of the BIS scheme for recognition of 
Standards Development Organizations (SDOs). 
 
For adoption of International Standards of ISO or IEC, the guidelines in IS 12 (Parts 2 and 3) 
(identical adoptions of ISO/IEC Guide 21-1 and 2) shall apply. The adoption of globally 
accepted standards of other SDOs/NSBs shall be subject to and governed by specific 
MoU/agreements/licence with such bodies permitting such adoptions. It may also be noted that 
all standards are governed by copyrights and therefore to even reproduce extracts from 
standards of other SDOs, whether national or international, it would require specific 
consent/permission of the concerned SDO. Similar approach shall be applicable for adoption

--- Page 42 ---
32 
 
of standards of any national SDO unless such SDO is a recognized or accredited SDO of BIS, 
when adoption of such standard shall be governed by the provisions under the 
recognition/accreditation of such national SDO. 
The proposal emanating within a Sectional Committee or otherwise, shall be further processed 
after resolving any copyright and/or trademark issues with the body whose standard is being 
adopted or extract from its standards are being reproduced, so that the proposed text can be 
freely copied and distributed to the members of the Sectional Committee without restriction. 
The need for specific permission to adopt their standards would not be applicable in the case 
of ISO/IEC adoptions, by virtue of the rights and privileges enjoyed by BIS for being a full 
member of these international standards bodies. 
When deciding as above, the following shall be ascertained: 
a) Standard has been developed by an SDO recognized or accredited by BIS or an SDO 
having global acceptance, 
b) Standard has been developed with significant participation and has a reasonable level of 
acceptance at national level, 
c) The standard presents no conflict with existing related Indian Standard, 
d) There is no evidence that the standard contains unfair provisions, 
e) There is no evidence of technical inadequacy of the standard, and 
f) There are no unacceptable references to other documents. 
 
If it is satisfied that the proposal should be further processed, then   
1) the proposal shall be referred to the concerned Sectional Committee for considering adoption of 
the standard as Indian Standard; 
2) the proposed standard shall be considered within the committee and thereafter issued in wide 
circulation for public comments. Comments, if any, received shall be dealt with by the Sectional 
Committee or by a separate panel constituted by the Sectional Committee; 
3) after deliberation in the committee, the draft standard shall be finalized by adopting the standard 
as it is or the text of the draft may be editorially and/or technically modified as per decision of 
the Sectional Committee and sent for publication duly approved by the Chairperson of the 
Division Council; 
4) incorporation of modifications in the text of the standard to be adopted would be governed by 
the terms and conditions in this regard in the agreement with the SDO whose standard is being 
adopted. In case of adoption of ISO/IEC standards, this shall be in accordance with the guidelines 
in IS 12 (Part 2 and 3) (or ISO/IEC Guide 21-1 and 2); 
5) in case of an urgent need for a standard to be adopted, the standard may be processed by the 
Sectional Committee with necessary modifications dispensing wide circulation. In the case of 
an ISO/IEC adoption, this shall be only when BIS/India has earlier approved the draft 
international standard at DIS/CDV/FDIS stage; 
6) adoption of standards of SDOs accredited/recognized by BIS under relevant BIS schemes shall 
follow the procedure detailed in the relevant schemes and its guidelines; and 
7) adopted Indian Standard shall bear IS number in dual number with that of the standard being 
adopted and may be made available for sale as agreed with the body whose standard is being 
recognized.

--- Page 43 ---
33 
 
NOTES  
1 The standard shall normally be assigned a dual number (an IS number with year and an ISO number or 
IEC number or concerned SDO number with its year). For special cases such as, Quality Management 
Systems (ISO 9000), Environmental Management System (ISO 14000) etc, the designation of 
publication may be indicated by IS followed by a slash and ISO or IEC designation (with the year of 
publication of ISO/IEC standard) (refer IS 12). 
2 ISO/IEC TR/TS/PAS are limited consensus documents. Sectional Committees should therefore 
exercise due care and diligence before arriving at a decision to adopt such documents as Indian Standard. 
3 ISO/IEC publishes Technical Reports (TRs) which has limited consultation in comparison to 
International Standards. TR does not contain any requirements and are mostly based on nascent 
technologies or provides detailed explanation of any existing standard.  Extra caution may be exercised 
while adopting ISO/IEC Technical Reports (TRs) as Indian Standard. 
 
8.4 Review of Standards 
 
8.4.1 General 
 
If required, standards or some of their provisions may be reviewed from time to time due to 
various reasons such as technological changes, technical comments received and changes in 
other connected standards. However, all standards have to be reviewed at least once in five 
years, as provided in Rule 23 of BIS Rules, 2018. Every standard shall, therefore, be reviewed 
by the Sectional Committee responsible within five years after publication (three years in case 
of LITD standards) or its last reaffirmation. Review of the standard may give rise to any of the 
following conclusions: 
 
a) Continuing without any change to the standard, 
b) Necessity of revision/amendment to the standard, or 
c) Necessity of withdrawal of the standard. 
 
In case of (a), the standard is reaffirmed and in case of (b), the standard is taken up for 
revision/amendment. However, till the establishment of the revised standard/amendment, the 
existing standard is reaffirmed. 
 
When a standard is due for review, a basic evaluation shall be made by the Member Secretary 
on the present position of base standard if any, technological developments in the country and 
elsewhere that may be relevant, harmonization status against International Standards, etc and 
provide any proposal for further consideration of the committee. The Sectional Committee shall 
be approached along with available information to consider a more detailed Action Research 
based review is required to be undertaken.  
The detailed review shall cover the following: 
 
1) Study and analysis of relevant international standards; 
2) Literature survey; 
3) Interaction with the industry on changes in technologies, practices, testing (including 
where necessary visiting relevant industry and feedback from laboratories or

--- Page 44 ---
34 
 
certification); 
4) Interaction with BIS offices and labs for feedback on certification and test method 
related issues; and 
5) Any comments/suggestions received and ongoing discussions in the committee relating 
to the standard. 
 
The Action Research for the review of standards may be assigned to the Member Secretary of 
the Sectional Committee, other scientific officers of BIS, members of the Sectional Committee, 
Subcommittee, Panel, Working Group, an expert, academic or research institution, industry 
association, a specific industry, ministry or an organization thereunder, etc. The Sectional 
Committee shall decide the individuals or organizations to be assigned Action Research 
Projects (ARP). The report from the review along with the draft document of proposed 
revision/amendment shall be considered by the Sectional Committee to decide whether the 
standard should be reaffirmed, amended and reaffirmed, taken up for revision and reaffirmed, 
or withdrawn. Following the receipt of comments and appropriate consultation on them with 
the Chairperson or at a meeting, the Sectional Committee decides the action to be taken on the 
standard. 
 
8.4.2 Comments on Published Standards 
 
Comments/feedback received on published standards from various stakeholders shall be 
registered online on BIS Standards Portal. These provide important inputs for standardization 
work to be considered by a technical committee. Comments are allotted registration numbers 
to be used for future reference. When comments are received over post/email, the same shall 
be entered in the online system by the concerned Member Secretary. Comments received shall 
be acknowledged, indicating that this would be considered by the concerned technical 
committee whose decision would be communicated in due course. After a comment has been 
considered by the concerned committee and a decision taken on the same, a further 
communication shall also be sent to the commentator conveying the decision of the committee. 
 
8.4.3 Reaffirmation 
 
If the concerned committee decides on continuing the standard without any change, the 
standard is reaffirmed. When a committee proposes that a standard be reaffirmed subject to 
amendment or revision, the standard is reaffirmed and the amendment or revision processed. 
The status of the standard after review by the committee shall be updated on the BIS standards 
portal. 
 
8.4.4 Amendment 
 
The issue of amendments to Indian Standards is kept to the minimum for the maintenance of 
clear and correct publication. It is essential, however, to correct an error that could be seriously

--- Page 45 ---
35 
 
or harmfully misleading, as quickly as possible. 
 
Typographical errors and reference changes are corrected as a matter of routine by issue of 
amendments. The technical amendment which alters and/or adds to previously agreed technical 
provisions in an existing Indian Standard requires committee approval, and normally made 
available for public comment and require approval of the Sectional Committee concerned. 
Issue of an amendment (urgent or non-controversial) without circulation as a draft for public 
comment requires approval of the concerned Sectional Committee. 
Unless there is some compelling reason, not more than five amendments should be issued for 
one edition of a standard. Sectional Committees should consider a revision by the time the third 
amendment is being prepared. 
 
As prescribed in Rule 23 of BIS Rules, 2018, the Director General has the powers to 
provisionally amend and notify such of the provisions of an Indian Standard as in his/her view 
are necessary for expeditious fulfilment of any of the objectives of the BIS Act, 2016. The 
ratification of the concerned Sectional Committee shall be duly obtained within six months of 
such notification. 
 
8.4.5 Revision 
 
The procedure specified for formulating a new standard is followed in the case of revision of a 
standard for preparation and processing of draft standard till its publication and establishment.  
 
8.4.5.1 Revision of standards referred to in a regulation 
 
In appropriate cases, the amendment or revision of a standard referred to in a regulation requires 
consultation with the responsible Government departments, regulatory bodies, representatives 
of which are either members of Sectional Committees or are involved for the particular 
discussion. The effective date of the change may need to be deferred until the corresponding 
regulation is amended. 
 
8.4.6 Withdrawal of a Standard 
 
The need for withdrawal of an Indian Standard shall be recommended by the Sectional 
Committee to the concerned Division Council for its decision in the matter (refer Rule 23 of 
BIS Rules, 2018). Since, Indian Standards are also referred in other Indian Standards, care shall 
be taken by the Sectional Committee while recommending a standard for withdrawal. 
Accordingly, the recommendation to withdraw an Indian Standard shall be circulated to the 
concerned Technical Departments with reason for withdrawal for a period not less than 14 days 
for their information and comments, if any. In case comments are received with reason on the 
need to retain the Indian Standard, the same shall be put up to the concerned Sectional 
Committee.

--- Page 46 ---
36 
 
On approval by the Division Council, the withdrawal shall be notified through gazette 
notification. Timely action shall also be required to effect any changes/amendment that may be 
necessary in other Indian Standards that makes a reference to the Indian Standard being 
withdrawn. 
 
8.5 Publication and Gazetting of Indian Standard 
 
8.5.1 Preparation of Documents for Publication 
 
This stage covers the preparation of the finalized draft for publication of Indian Standard. It is 
the responsibility of the secretariat concerned to deal without delay with all necessary work at 
this stage. The same procedure is followed for a new standard, revision of an existing standard 
or amendment to an existing standard. 
 
The Member Secretary shall arrange preparation of the final version of draft standard (F Draft), 
verify the technical content, the standard clauses, editorial accuracy and presentation of the 
document in the format as per IS 12, incorporation of recorded decisions of the concerned 
committee and process further for publication. Consistency in terminology, forms of 
expression, structure of presentation, accuracy of cross-references and conventions, such as 
units and symbols, abbreviations and foot notes, etc are also to be checked. 
 
8.5.2 Processing and Publication 
 
The copy of finalized draft prepared by the Member Secretary shall be put up to the Head of 
the Technical Department, who by virtue of his/her vast experience and involvement shall 
check and ensure that the document is fit for publication, having followed due process 
including overall technical and editorial accuracy.  
 
The manuscript of the finalized draft standard along with cover pages and drawings, if any, 
shall thereafter be uploaded on the Standardization Portal for further action by Publication 
Department, who shall arrange to examine the same for any corrections to bring the document 
in line with IS 12 format. 
 
In case of documents for publication through adoption, the national foreword and national 
annexes, if any, shall be sent to the Publication Department along with the soft copy of the 
relevant IEC/ISO standard/other SDO standard. 
 
The Publication Department shall send the edited copy of the final document corrected with 
queries, if any, which shall be examined by the Member Secretary concerned for acceptance 
and resolving the queries raised. The edited document shall be sent back to Publication 
Department for making the proof of the standard. The publication Department shall send the 
proof which shall be examined by the Member Secretary. Any changes that seem to be essential 
concerning the presentation of text, drawings, tables, etc, or errors shall be suitably marked and 
sent back to the Publication Department without any delay.

--- Page 47 ---
37 
 
 
The final document in proof form shall then be sent to the Chairperson of the Division Council 
for   his/her approval for its adoption as an Indian Standard. The document so approved shall 
be sent to the Publication Department for publishing and gazette notification. The Member 
Secretary of the technical committee and Head of the Technical Department having ensured the 
correctness of the publication in all respects, shall also upload the gazette details to Publication 
indicating the date from which the standard shall be established and the period of concurrent 
running of the new and existing versions of the standards (in case of revisions). The date of 
establishment of a new or revised standard and the date of withdrawal of an existing standard 
being superseded (based on the period of concurrent running) shall be decided following the 
applicable guidelines that has been issued on concurrent running of two standards. The period 
of concurrent running of standards with and without amendments, shall similarly be decided 
following the same guidelines.  
 
Guidelines for Publication Department on processing of documents through various stages of 
publication along with their timelines, as issued from time to time, may also be referred. 
 
8.5.3 Notification and Gazetting of Standard 
 
As provided under BIS Rule 15(2) and 22(6) of BIS Rules, 2018, Indian Standards, including 
provisional and recognized standards, their revisions, amendments and withdrawal, shall be 
established by notification in the official gazette.  
 
Publication Department shall prepare gazette notification proposal based on the inputs provided 
by the concerned technical department and the period of concurrent running decided upon (in 
consultation with Central Marks Departments, where applicable), and shall accordingly submit 
the proposal for establishment of a new standard or revision of an existing standard, or 
amendment to a standard, or withdrawal of a standard, for approval, to DG through the Activity 
Head/DDG concerned. 
 
The Publication Department shall then arrange for gazette notification in the Gazette of India. 
The final copy of the standard/amendment thus established shall be uploaded in the Portal. 
 
8.6 R&D Work for Development of Standards 
 
It is often required to obtain latest R&D data and technical inputs while formulating new 
standards or revising existing Indian Standards so that these standards reflect the state-of-the-
art and latest technologies and are at par with international standards/practices. This often 
necessitates intensive involvement of expert organizations for the R&D/technological inputs 
on specific subjects/issues. Specific R&D work leading to development of new 
standard(s)/revision of existing standard(s) may have to be assigned to such expert 
organizations. Such research and development work may be undertaken by BIS through 
appropriate R&D institutions, with approval of the Division Council. In addition, major

--- Page 48 ---
38 
 
technical assignments involving subjects that are complex and of specialized nature or 
involving voluminous technical work or where a group of interrelated standards are to be 
developed/revised, the work may have to be outsourced to organizations/individual experts 
having necessary expertise. All such work shall be governed by relevant guidelines/procedures 
on the same, framed from time to time.  
8.7 Appeals 
 
An appeal can be made on issues relating to standards development process.  
 
An appeal can be made by a member against any action or inaction of the committee when the 
same is not in accordance with the BIS Rules and procedures of standards formulation. The 
appeal can be on decision taken on new subject proposals/drafts (preliminary, wide circulation 
and final) or any other aspects in standardization process. 
 
The appeal shall be submitted to the BIS Secretariat within one month of such decision. On 
receiving the appeal, the secretariat shall communicate the same to the concerned appellate 
authority (that is Sectional Committee in case of Subcommittee and Division Council in case 
of Sectional Committee). 
 
If the concerned appellate authority agrees with the decision/action of the subordinate 
committee, the appellant shall either accept the decision or can appeal against it to the next 
higher body, within one month's time. The decision of the higher body shall be binding in such 
cases. 
 
When an appeal relating to subject or document is against a decision in respect of work in 
progress, pending any decision on the appeal, the work shall be continued till the F Draft stage. 
Further action on the document would be taken after a decision has been arrived on the appeal. 
 
It may be understood that decisions may not be unanimous on all points; some compromise is 
usually accepted in reaching consensus. If a member feels strongly that he/she has not received 
a fair hearing, he/she should speak to the committee Chairperson and Member Secretary. If the 
problem is not resolved in this way, it may be taken up with BIS. It should be understood, 
however, that the only way to make progress where strongly held opposing points of view 
exists is for one side or both to make concessions. A member who feels that the committee has 
not followed the due process in formulation of a standard may make an appeal in this regard to 
the next higher committee. 
8.8 Patents and Copyright 
 
8.8.1 Copyright 
 
The copyright for all drafts and Indian Standards and other publications belongs to BIS.

--- Page 49 ---
39 
 
The content of an Indian Standard for example may originate from a number of sources, 
including existing company standard or an SDO standard, articles published in scientific or 
trade journals, original research and development work, descriptions of commercialized 
products, etc. These sources may be subject to one or more rights. 
It is an understanding that original material contributed, to become a part of a BIS publication, 
can be copied and distributed as part of the BIS standardization process (as relevant) as part of 
the consensus building process, this being without prejudice to the rights of the original 
copyright owner to exploit the original text elsewhere. Where material is already subject to 
copyright, the right should be granted to BIS to reproduce and circulate the material. This is 
frequently done without recourse to a written agreement, or at most to a simple written statement 
of acceptance. Where contributors wish a formal signed agreement concerning copyright of 
any submissions they make to BIS (including in technical committees), they may submit a 
request in this regard. 
 
Standards of other SDOs, national, international (except for ISO and IEC) or global shall not 
be adopted or extracts of such standards used in the text of an Indian Standard without prior 
approval of the concerned SDO (usually through a license agreement/MoU/consent letter).  
 
NOTE – Reference to any SDO standard (international or global or national, other than ISO/IEC) is 
discouraged and where required, all efforts shall be made by the concerned Sectional Committee to develop 
Indian Standards on such subjects.  
 
8.8.2 Reproduction of Indian Standards 
 
Permission to reproduce any part of an Indian Standard by an individual or organization should 
be sought in writing. While considering such cases, the financial aspect needs to be looked into 
in detail by the Publication Department, before the request is forwarded to the concerned 
technical department to assess the extent of reproduction being requested. Based on the inputs 
provided by the technical department, Publication Department would further process such 
requests following applicable guidelines. 
 
8.8.3 Reference to Patented Items  
 
If, in exceptional situations, technical reasons justify such a step, there is no objection in 
principle to preparing an Indian Standard in terms which include the use of items covered by 
patent rights defined as patents, utility models and other statutory rights based on inventions, 
including any published applications for any of the foregoing, even if the terms of the standard 
are such that there are no alternative means of compliance. The guidelines given below shall 
be applied in such cases. 
 
If technical reasons justify the preparation of a document in terms which include the use of 
items covered by patent rights, the following procedures shall be complied with:

--- Page 50 ---
40 
 
a) The proposer of a subject for standardization shall draw the attention of the committee 
to any patent rights of which the proposer is aware and considers to cover any item of 
the proposal. Also, any party involved in the preparation of a document shall draw the 
attention of the committee to any patent rights of which it becomes aware during any 
stage in the development of a new standard or in revision of a standard. 
b) If the proposal is accepted on technical grounds, the proposer shall ask any holder of 
such identified patent rights for a statement that the holder would be willing to negotiate 
licenses under his/her rights with applicants on reasonable and non-discriminatory 
terms and conditions. Such negotiations are left to the parties concerned and are 
performed outside BIS. A record of the right holder's statement shall be kept as record 
of the concerned technical department and shall be referred to in the foreword to the 
relevant document. If the right holder though having agreed/involved in the 
development of the standard (involving such patents), does not provide such a 
statement, the committee concerned shall not proceed with inclusion of an item covered 
by a patent right in the document without authorization from SAC/EC of BIS as 
appropriate. 
c) A document shall not be published until the statements of the holders of all identified 
patent rights have been received or an authorization obtained. Should it be revealed 
after publication of a document that licenses under patent rights, which appear to cover 
items included in the document, cannot be obtained under reasonable and non-
discriminatory terms and conditions, the document shall be referred back to the relevant 
committee for further consideration. 
 
9 MANAGEMENT OF MEETINGS 
 
9.1  Principles 
 
The primary job of technical committees is to formulate standards by progressively building 
consensus from within a small group of experts to that within the committee and finally a 
national consultation by seeking public comments and getting these resolved in the committees. 
 
Therefore, the objective of convening meetings would depend upon the type of committee. 
Meetings of panels/working groups are convened in order to carry out the task assigned to it 
by the parent committee which is largely to deliberate and decide on the contents of the 
standard/amendment under development. Sectional Committees and Subcommittees are 
convened to consider the recommendations of subordinate committees i.e. Panels, Working 
Groups or Subcommittees, and decide on the progression from one stage to the next. It may be 
noted that the work done /actions taken at the level of Panels/Working groups/ Subcommittees 
culminates at the level of Sectional Committees.  At times or on some of the areas under the scope 
of work of the Sectional Committee, the Sectional Committees may work directly without the 
assistance of any subordinate committees.

--- Page 51 ---
41 
 
9.2  Annual Meeting Calendar 
 
Meetings of technical committees are convened based on priorities involved and normally once 
in three months. An Annual Meeting Calendar for the year shall be prepared well in advance 
in consultation with the concerned Chairperson. This shall be uploaded on BIS Standards Portal 
and be available in public domain/accessed by members. 
 
Meetings can be fully physical or hybrid (physical with video conferencing facilities) or fully 
virtual (video conferencing only). In general, all meetings should be planned as hybrid 
meetings. The decision on the mode of conducting meetings shall be of the Chairperson and 
Member Secretary. It is to be noted that critical issues to be discussed which may require 
intense debate and deliberation may call for opting for meetings in physical or hybrid mode.                           
 
It is to be borne in mind that conducting meetings involve use of valuable resources both of 
BIS as well as of the committee members. Meetings should therefore be purposeful, result 
oriented and with substantive agenda. It should also be understood that the intervening period 
between two successive meetings of a Sectional Committee involves a series of actions 
(including meetings of Working groups, Panels or Subcommittees) that leads to the progress 
of a standardization project. Sectional Committee meetings are therefore a culmination of such 
actions meant for obtaining approvals to move from one stage to the next stage of a standards 
development project, apart from deciding on various other matters. 
 
Meetings are open for participation to nominated member organizations, their nominated 
representatives and to nominated individual experts (see also 7.10). 
 
The first meeting of all Sectional Committees whether held in BIS HQs or outside or virtually 
shall be addressed by the Activity Head /DDG concerned. 
 
9.3  Conduct of Meetings and Subsequent Actions 
 
9.3.1   Fixing the Venue and Date of Meeting 
 
Meetings are held in accordance with the annual calendar of meetings. These may be fully 
virtual, or hybrid (where both physical and virtual participation is permitted). The final date of 
the meeting and venue shall be fixed by the Member Secretary in consultation with the 
Chairperson/Convener. Meetings when held in hybrid mode can be conducted at BIS HQs, BIS 
ROs/BOs/Labs or outside or hosted by a member organization. 
 
NOTE – If in a particular case, the Chairperson’s concurrence cannot be obtained and there is an urgent need 
for convening the meeting, the Member Secretary concerned shall act in consultation with the Head of the 
Department. 
When meetings are to be conducted virtually, the location of the facilities to be utilized shall 
be decided and the availability confirmed before fixing the date.

--- Page 52 ---
42 
 
9.3.2   Issue of Meeting Notice 
The Member Secretary shall ensure that a meeting notice is issued to the members sufficiently 
in advance (preferably 2 weeks). The notice convening a meeting shall include the time and 
date, venue (with telephone number, if known) and the place where the meeting is to be held. 
Meeting notice shall be issued on the Standardization Portal. Where the agenda is to be 
circulated separately, a note to the effect shall be added in the meeting notice. For virtual 
meetings, the meeting notice shall clearly indicate the meeting link. 
 
9.3.3    Invitation to Meeting 
The Member Secretary may extend with the prior knowledge of the Chairperson/Departmental 
Head concerned, an invitation to individuals or representatives of organizations who are not 
members of the committee but whose presence is likely to be helpful in the discussions 
proposed to be held under the agenda. While all courtesy should be shown to the invitees when 
they participate in the discussion, they shall not be entitled to the privileges of a member and 
shall be allowed only for the part of the deliberations concerning the relevant agenda item. 
Special care has to be taken by the Member Secretary to ensure that no financial commitment 
is made in these invitations. 
NOTE – If any certification or laboratory related issue is part of the agenda, then the concerned department in 
BIS may also be invited for the meeting. 
 
9.3.4   Preparation of Agenda 
 
The agenda shall cover all business required to be placed before the technical committee for 
deliberation/information/decision. It normally covers the following matters, as applicable: 
a) Confirmation of minutes of the previous meeting; 
b) Issues arising from the previous meetings; 
c) Review of its own scope and composition and the composition of its Subcommittees/    
Panels/Working Groups; 
d) Progress on Programme of Work; 
e) Comments received on published standards or on relevant subjects; 
f) Recommendations from evaluation of standards for review by Member Secretary; and 
g) Report on international work, including alignment of national standards with ISO/IEC 
standards and of forthcoming international meetings. 
A typical agenda format covering essential items to be considered in committee meeting is 
given in Annex G. 
 
 
9.3.4.1 Systematic approach in preparation of agenda 
 
A systematic approach shall be followed in preparing the agenda. It is well advised to maintain

--- Page 53 ---
43 
 
an Agenda Point Register for keeping a note of agenda points to be discussed in the next 
meeting of the committee  
 
Virtual meetings are of shorter duration as compared to hybrid meetings, and it may therefore be 
necessary to often have a series of successive virtual meetings to cover the entire agenda. It is 
therefore important to have a clear plan of action on the agenda points to be taken up in a 
particular virtual session. This shall be carried out by the Member Secretary in consultation 
with the Chairperson/Convener so as to have a clear understanding of the objectives of the 
deliberations/discussions and the targeted outcome so as to steer a meaningful and effective 
meeting. It is suggested that the time frame for each agenda point should preferably be planned 
in advance and mentioned in the agenda. 
 
9.3.4.2 Other measures in preparation and circulation of agenda 
 
a) The agenda shall be issued preferably two weeks in advance through the standards 
portal. At the earliest opportunity but not later than the issue of notice of the meeting, 
members may be requested to forward in writing suggestions for matters which they 
would wish to be included in the agenda. 
b) Supplementary agenda may be issued to include: 
1) Additional business matured for consideration after the issue of the agenda, 
including business of which notice has been given by members but which could 
not be included in the agenda, may be issued in the form of supplementary 
agenda. 
2) Supplementary agenda may be sent to members in advance where possible or 
distributed/shared during the meeting. 
c) Copies of the agenda of technical committees shall be marked ‘For BIS Use Only’. 
d) Points for discussion under item ‘Any Other Business’ shall be for items not already 
covered in agenda, with the permission of the Chairperson. 
e) In the case of the first meeting of a sectional committee, an additional agenda item, like 
‘Inauguration, and Scope of Work including Background to the Formation of the 
Committee’, is included. 
 
9.3.4.3 Agenda copy for the Member Secretary 
 
It is a good practice to have one copy of the Agenda, interleaved with blank sheets, to enable 
the Member Secretary to make notes in advance relating to different items of the agenda, 
references, previous history and any related information useful for the committee. This copy 
shall serve as a master copy of the entire transaction of a meeting and should be filed after the 
meeting for subsequent references and record. Such noting and recordings can be in electronic 
form also.

--- Page 54 ---
44 
 
9.3.5    Further Action Prior to Meeting 
 
The Member Secretary should study and correlate all the agenda points with their relevant 
background information and reference material for presenting these before the committee in 
the meeting. Wherever available these shall be maintained in electronic form. It is the 
responsibility of the Member Secretary to analyze all possible queries that are likely to be raised 
during discussions in the meeting and to therefore prepare accordingly. The materials listed 
below should be collected before the meeting. 
 
a) Agenda and minutes of the previous meetings; 
b) Relevant draft standards/amendments; 
c) Relevant IS (with latest amendments) including all reference standards; 
d) Reference books/ literature/ materials; 
e) Programme of work of the department; 
f) Form for claiming TA/DA by members; and 
g) Form for recording attendance of the members. 
 
NOTE – Member Secretary may utilize this occasion to obtain up-do-date information on mailing 
address, telephone number, email ids etc so that BIS data base on technical committee membership is 
updated if need be. 
 
9.3.5.1 Briefing the Chairperson 
 
It is advisable for the concerned Member Secretary to consult/meet the Chairperson of the 
committee in advance to discuss the agenda and propose a plan of action for the meeting, 
particularly on the contentious issues, so as to help resolve the same amicably during the 
meeting.  
 
9.3.5.2 Action during the meeting 
 
A Member Secretary should take charge of the meeting from behind, playing an important role 
to achieve successful deliberations in the meeting, for which he is required to: 
 
a) Introduce each point of the Agenda giving history background of each issue. 
b) Help keeping the discussions to the point, steering away from any diversionary issues. 
c) Ensure that views of all members are heard, and assist in evolving consensus, with the 
help of the Chairperson. 
d) Take detailed note of the deliberations and decisions taken. 
 
9.3.5.3 Cancellation and postponement of meeting 
 
If a meeting once called is postponed or cancelled for some reason or there is any change in 
the  programme  of  the  meeting,  information   shall  be  sent  to  all  concerned   through  the

--- Page 55 ---
45 
 
Standardization Portal and emails, including to the under mentioned: 
  
a) Committee members concerned,  
b) Invitees, if any, 
c) Relevant departments in BIS HQ like Administration Department, GSD, Canteen, ITSD, 
etc (when meeting was to be held in HQs) or Regional/Branch Office concerned or the 
organization in whose premises the meeting was to be held, and 
d) Other persons who had been requested to assist in holding and conducting the meeting. 
 
9.3.5.4 Arrangements for the meeting 
 
The Member Secretary shall ensure that proper arrangements are made as per the list given 
below, before the meetings: 
 
a) Various arrangements such as meeting link and IT support, presentations, laptops and 
of seating, microphones, display arrangements (in case of physical meetings), etc; 
b) That members on arrival can be directed to the room, placards and direction indicators 
being used where necessary; 
c) Arrangements made for taking a photograph at the meeting, if required; and 
d) Any secretarial support required for the meeting or to any member during the meeting 
(in case of physical meetings). 
 
In case of meetings held at places other than BIS premises, a member of the committee or the 
organization which has assisted in securing the committee room should be requested to attend 
to the preliminary arrangements, care being taken that the requirement for such assistance is 
clearly conveyed in advance. 
 
9.3.5.5 Refreshments in meetings 
 
Member Secretary shall familiarize himself/herself with admissibility of expenditure on 
refreshments. He will ensure that suitable refreshment arrangements (tea, lunch, etc) are made 
for the meetings and that the expenditure on refreshments does not exceed the admissible limit. 
He/she should also draw advance to meet the expenditure of refreshment when meetings are 
held outside HQs. 
 
Refreshment expenditure should be certified and forwarded to the Accounts Department for 
settlement of dues. 
 
9.3.6   Hospitality from Outside Organization 
 
Normally there shall be no bar on accepting hospitality for a committee meeting from 
organization or individuals. While accepting such offers the Member Secretary shall use his/her 
discretion in judging the ultimate purpose of the intending host. It may be made clear to the 
host organization that the occasion should not be utilized for their publicity purpose.

--- Page 56 ---
46 
 
9.3.7  Order and Conduct of Business  
 
The order of business shall be as follows: 
a) The order of business shall be as stated in the agenda. 
b) Members may propose at the start of the meeting, for a change in the order of 
business and the order shall be changed if a majority of the members are in favour. 
c) The Chairperson may, at his/her discretion, move a change in the order of business 
at any time.  
 
The Member Secretary should ensure that BIS policies and viewpoints are appropriately 
projected before the Committee. He should provide guidance to the Committee on procedural 
matters, and ensure that the business is conducted in an orderly manner. 
 
The Member Secretary should take notes of discussion during the course of the meeting 
including the rationale to the decisions taken by the committee in order to prepare the minutes 
of the meeting. Since technical committees work on the principle of consensus, the Member 
Secretary along with the Chair of the committee shall use their skill in resolving sharp 
differences among various members. Advantages may be taken of short breaks/intervals in 
meetings to resolve any sharp difference developed during the course of discussions. 
 
When introducing discussion on technical documents, the Member Secretary shall provide, as 
required, previous history of the document, information on related Indian Standards, ISO/IEC 
standards/draft standards and standards/draft standards of the other countries, information on 
technological development, export-import data and related laws, regulations, etc. He shall 
apprise the committee of the decisions taken by the committee in its previous meetings and 
other similar material, which can help the committee in taking a proper decision. 
 
Specific guidelines to be followed in conducting virtual meetings are given in Annex H. The 
Member Secretary should circulate these guidelines to meeting participants for facilitating 
smooth and effective conduct of meetings. 
 
 9.3.8   Action After the Meeting 
 
After each technical committee meeting, the Member Secretary will brief the Head of the 
Department/the concerned Activity Head about the controversial issues, if any, discussed in 
the meeting. The Activity Head, in turn, will bring it to the notice of DG, wherever required. 
9.3.9   Proceedings and Minutes 
 
Proceedings are a record of the discussions at meetings of Standards Advisory Committee and 
Division Council in detail along with the decisions. This term shall not be used for record of 
business of other technical committee meetings. 
 
Minutes are a brief record of business transacted at meetings of all other technical committees

--- Page 57 ---
47 
 
of BIS along with the decisions taken. Decisions are the most significant part of the minutes 
and shall be stated clearly and without ambiguity. 
 
Minutes should be brief, but should state decisions taken clearly without any ambiguity and 
recording the reasoning for the same. It should not attempt to record all that was said and who 
said it as this may lead to endless correspondence. It is however necessary to record important 
details of the technical discussions particularly the rationale behind decisions and also points 
of disagreement (for contentious issues, the views of various members may be properly 
recorded). 
 
All the comments received on the published and draft standards should be disposed of recording 
justification particularly for any disagreement with the comment. 
 
Proceedings and minutes are primarily meant for those who took part in the meeting and those 
who have to take action on them. 
 
When a member of the committee renders special meritorious service, the committee should 
record its appreciation suitably. 
 
9.3.9.1 Preparation of the minutes 
 
Draft minutes should preferably be prepared on the same day but definitely within a week of 
the meeting. Every effort shall be made to obtain an early approval of the Chairperson for the 
draft minutes. In case of difficulty in obtaining the approval of the Chairperson in time, the 
draft minutes may be circulated to the members and got approved by circulation. 
 
The Member Secretary should prepare an action copy of the minutes, and completing actions 
on various decisions recorded, at the earliest. 
 
9.3.9.2 Circulation of the minutes 
 
a) To members: 
1) The minutes approved by the Chairperson or otherwise shall be circulated to the 
members of the Committee by uploading on BIS Standardization Portal. A deadline, 
of not more than two weeks shall be fixed by which comments on minutes on the 
accuracy of the recording, if any, should reach the Member Secretary and beyond 
which it will be assumed that the members concerned have no comments to make. 
2) Should any comments be received and the Member Secretary is able to accept them, 
the correction shall be circulated to the members or recorded in the Agenda of the 
next meeting under the item ‘Confirmation of minutes of the last meeting’. If the 
correction is of such nature that important actions are affected by the same, 
correction should be circulated among the members with approval of the Chair. 
3) In the event of the Member Secretary not finding it possible to accept the comments

--- Page 58 ---
48 
 
of the member, an attempt shall be made to reconcile the difference of view with the 
aid of the Chairperson but avoiding any long drawn controversy or correspondence. 
Where necessary the matter reported and discussed at the next meeting under the 
item ‘Confirmation of Minutes of Last Meeting’. 
b) When the minutes deal with matters of direct interest to other committees, a copy of the 
minutes or its relevant extracts shall be passed on to the Member Secretaries of these 
committees, their specific attention being drawn to the portion of particular interest to 
them. 
c) To the Secretaries of Liaison Committees. 
d) To the invitees (extracts of portions relevant to them). 
 
The Member Secretary shall maintain a note of the action that has to be taken and persons or 
authorities who have to take it. It is a good practice to maintain an action copy of minutes 
interleaved with blank pages to enable the Member Secretary to note and keep track of the 
actions required and taken in a systematic way. Such tracking can be done in electronic form 
also. 
 
9.3.10   Action on Minutes 
 
Action shall be started on normal and non-controversial contents of the minutes without waiting 
till the deadline fixed for the receipt of the comments on the minutes. Action on the remaining 
items of the minutes shall be started after the deadline. 
Decisions taken by the committee on comments received on Indian Standards shall be 
communicated to the commentator. 
The Member Secretary shall keep a watch on the action taken, make a note of the progress 
made from time to time and supplement the efforts by way of reminders or otherwise to ensure 
that action on any item does not stagnate or impede the progress of work. 
 
In case a comment is received from a member, whether or not present in the meeting, conveying 
opposition to the decision taken in the technical committee meeting, the comment may be taken 
up in the next meeting for consideration, without stopping further processing of the document 
as per the decision in the meeting. 
 
Generally, comments received after the meeting on drafts discussed in the meetings shall be 
considered in the next meeting and action as per the decisions taken on the draft in the meetings 
shall be proceeded with. In case of comments on drafts that have been finalized in the meeting, 
these shall be considered as comments on the published standard and dealt with accordingly. 
 
The Member Secretary may issue press-note/social media posts, depending upon the important 
of the decisions taken in the meeting.

--- Page 59 ---
49 
 
The Member Secretary may issue write-up for publication in Standards India for meetings 
involving important decisions. 
 
9.3.11    Follow up Actions 
 
The Member Secretary has to take follow up action on the minutes in order to further the work 
relating to the technical committees. It shall be ensured that actions required to be taken up first 
are disposed of at the earliest, and so on. 
 
The major actions generally involved are: 
 
a) Communications that have to be initiated to establish contact with organizations and 
individuals in relation to work programme decided upon; 
b) Modifications of draft standards, drawings, etc as decided by the committee; 
c) Updating of mailing address, if any and circulation of documents and information to 
the interests and organizations for development of draft standards, eliciting comments 
as per the decision of the committee; and 
d) Any other work which needs immediate attention. 
 
9.3.12   Recognition of Contribution of Members to Standardization Work 
 
Guidelines issued on recognition of contribution of members to standardization work from time 
to time shall be followed. 
 
9.3.13   Supervision of Work and Periodic Monitoring of Progress 
 
The Member Secretary shall maintain a close supervision on the work assigned to his/her 
charge, with particular attention to time targets set on various projects. Heads of the Technical 
Departments shall periodically review the progress of work of the committees under their 
department Where necessary, issues shall be followed up with concerned members as well as 
with their parent organizations. 
Soon after the meeting and after taking follow up actions, updation of the work programme of 
the committee shall be verified on the BIS Standardization Portal and discrepancies, if any, 
sorted out with the IT Department/Administrator of the portal. 
 
9.3.14   Funding Travelling and Stay Expenses of Committee Members 
 
This is governed by the provisions prescribed in Rule 20 of BIS Rules, 2018 and specific 
guidelines issued from time to time on the same. It will be necessary to obtain administrative 
approval for sanction of reimbursement of travelling and stay expenses for each meeting 
separately, taking into account the guidelines prescribed. In case the competent authority 
decides that expenditure on travelling and stay is not to be incurred by BIS, the concerned 
member shall be informed. Guidelines issued from time to time in this regard shall be followed.

--- Page 60 ---
50 
 
10   PARTICIPATION IN INTERNATIONAL STANDARDIZATION 
 
10.1 Principles 
Harmonizing national standards with international standards provides opportunities for Indian 
industries to be globally competitive and have market access. To facilitate the adoption of 
international standards, it is necessary that national requirements get addressed at the time of 
development of international standards. While participating in Technical Committees and 
Subcommittees of international standards bodies (ISO/IEC) enables India to comment on draft 
standards and pursue the incorporation of requirements that are of interest of Indian 
stakeholders, it is more important to be able to influence the development of international 
standards from the very beginning. Participation of Indian experts at the Working Group level 
of ISO/IEC is therefore of critical importance. For India to effectively influence international 
standardization work, it is also crucial that our participation in the Technical Committees of 
the international standardization bodies is on subjects that are of interest based on strategic 
considerations like trade and dissemination of technologies. It is simultaneously important to 
look into potential areas of standardization where India can play a leadership role particularly 
in sectors of the economy where India has the potential to influence the global economy, trade 
or technology. 
In light of the above considerations, BIS Sectional Committees/Division Councils need to 
identify priority areas of participation in ISO and IEC that are of strategic importance to India, 
identify relevant experts who would participate (emphasizing on ensuring continuity in such 
participation) and decide on which of the committees India needs to actively engage in. It is 
also a constant endeavour for all Sectional Committees to identify subjects where India can 
propose new work items for standardization or propose new areas of work and establishment 
of new technical committees and stake claim of secretariats of such committees. 
 
10.2 General 
BIS, being the National Standards Body, represents India in International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) and through the Indian National Committee of IEC, in International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). 
BIS/India being a full member in both ISO and IEC have the right to participate in the 
governance and policy committees of these two bodies as well as in the Technical Committees, 
with full voting rights in all such committees in which it participates. BIS has the rights to also 
adopt any of the International Standards of ISO and IEC as Indian Standards.  
Adoption of other global standards/any other national standards would be subject to agreement 
with the concerned standards bodies.

--- Page 61 ---
51 
 
10.3 Participation in the work of ISO/IEC Technical Committees and Subcommittees 
10.3.1 BIS may choose to be a Participating member (P-member) or an Observer member (O-
member) in any of the Technical Committees or Subcommittees of ISO and IEC, including of 
ISO/IEC 
JTC 
1. 
The 
decision 
to 
participate 
in 
an 
international 
Technical 
Committee/Subcommittee rest with the concerned Sectional Committee of BIS (with the 
approval of its Division Council), whose scope of work is similar or aligned (fully or partly) 
with the scope of work of an ISO/IEC committee. Such a committee of BIS is called the 
National Mirror Committee (NMC) of the corresponding ISO/IEC committee. The decision to 
participate and the extent of involvement/participation in the international standardization work 
is based on the relevance of the international work to India and the expertise available in the 
country to involve in and contribute to the work of the ISO/IEC committee. The intent to be a 
member, whether P or O, shall be communicated to the CEO/Central Secretariat of ISO or 
Central Office of IEC. All such communications are coordinated through IR&TISD in BIS. 
 
The responsibilities/obligations of each of the membership are given below: 
a) For P-membership to participate actively in the work, with an obligation to vote on all 
questions formally submitted for voting within the Technical Committee or 
Subcommittee, on enquiry drafts, final draft International Standards, systematic 
reviews of international standards and, to participate in meetings, wherever required. 
b) For O- membership to follow the work as an observer, and therefore to receive 
committee documents and to have the right to submit comments and to attend meetings, 
if required  
c) To choose to be neither P-member nor O-member of a given committee, in which case 
it will have neither the rights nor the obligations indicated above with regard to the work 
of that committee. 
 
NOTE – Refer the latest ISO/IEC Directives Part 1. 
 
10.3.2 Membership of an ISO/IEC Subcommittee is open to both P and O members of the 
parent Technical Committee. Membership of a Technical Committee does not imply automatic 
membership of its Subcommittee. Intention to take membership of a Subcommittee needs to 
be notified to ISO/IEC. Members of a Technical Committee is given the opportunity to notify 
their intention to become a P-member or O-member of a Subcommittee at the time of its 
establishment. 
10.3.3 Irrespective of the status (P or O) within the Technical Committee or Subcommittee of 
ISO/IEC, the national body can vote on New Proposals (NPs), Enquiry Drafts (DIS/CDV) and 
on Final Draft International Standards (FDIS). 
Although, it is not obligatory for O members to vote, it is important to consider and vote on 
subjects on committees when these are not favourable to India’s interest and should therefore 
be voted against.

--- Page 62 ---
52 
 
10.3.4 The Sectional Committees (that is the NMCs) have the responsibility to organize the 
national input in an efficient and timely manner, taking account of all relevant interests at the 
national level. It is also the responsibility of P-members to participate in the meetings of the 
committees. Sectional Committees therefore have the responsibility to assess the work of the 
committees of which they are the NMC and decide on India's participation in the meetings of 
the committees. Hence, NMCs should ascertain the available expertise in the committee along 
with identified experts who are willing to contribute while taking P membership. 
 
10.3.5 Beginning or ending membership or change in membership status of any ISO/IEC 
Technical Committee or Subcommittee may be done by informing the office of CEO and the 
secretariat of the ISO/IEC Committee concerned. Such communication is made by/coordinated 
by IR&TISD.  
 
10.3.6 The ISO/IEC secretariat concerned notifies the Chief Executive Officer of ISO/IEC if a P-
member of the Technical Committee or Subcommittee has been persistently inactive in two 
consecutive meetings, either by direct participation or by correspondence, or has failed to vote 
on questions submitted for voting within the Technical Committee or Subcommittee (such as 
new work item proposals) and on Committee Internal Ballots (CIBs) including systematic 
reviews or draft standards (DIS/CDV) or FDIS. 
10.3.6.1 If a P-member of an ISO/IEC Technical Committee or Subcommittee fails to vote on 
an enquiry draft or final draft international standard or systematic reviews prepared by the 
respective committees, the CEO reminds the national body of its obligation to vote. In the 
absence of a response to this reminder, membership status in the respective committee 
automatically changes to that of O-member. A national body having its status so changed may 
after a period of twelve months, indicate to the CEO that it wishes to regain P-membership of 
the committee in which case it shall be granted. 
 
10.4 Secretariat of Technical Committees and Subcommittees 
 
10.4.1 The secretariat of a Technical Committee is allocated to a national body/national 
committee by ISO Technical Management Board/IEC Standardization Management Board. 
 
10.4.2 The secretariat of a Subcommittee is allocated to a national body/national committee by 
the parent Technical Committee. 
 
10.4.3 Secretariat of a Technical Committee and Subcommittee is allocated to a national 
body/national committee only if the national body/national committee: 
 
a) has indicated its intention to participate actively in the work of that Technical 
Committee or Subcommittee; and 
b) has accepted that it will fulfill its responsibilities as secretariat and is in a position to 
ensure that adequate resources are available for secretariat work. Once the secretariat

--- Page 63 ---
53 
 
of a Technical Committee or Subcommittee has been allocated by ISO to the national 
body/national committee, the latter shall appoint a qualified individual as Committee 
Manager (for ISO committees)/Secretary (for IEC committees).  
       NOTE – Refer ISO/IEC Directives (Part 1) for roles and responsibilities of Committee Manager. 
 
10.4.4 Assumption of Secretariat Responsibility by BIS 
 
10.4.4.1 The secretariat shall act in a purely international capacity, divesting itself of a national 
point of view. 
10.4.4.2 The secretariat of an international committee can have great influence on the speed 
and direction of work and on the structure and editorial quality of the resulting standard. The 
country proposing work on a project usually has the greatest interest in it and should be ready 
to act as secretariat if a new committee has to be formed, or the seriousness of its intentions 
may be doubted. Proposals for international work requiring a new committee should therefore 
be accompanied by a justification of the use of BIS staff time on secretariat duties. 
10.4.4.3 In making this assessment it should be assumed that the secretariat should be kept at 
least for the time necessary to get the work programme well under way and the committee 
operating smoothly. Normally 10-year tenure should be regarded as the minimum. During this 
period the commitment will probably expand, involving increasing staff time, travel, etc. It is 
not worth offering to take a secretariat unless this long term and expanding commitment can 
be continuously and properly supported. 
10.4.4.4 Considering the resource commitments (financial as well as manpower), the proposal 
for the secretariat shall be put up to DG, BIS for approval. The work of secretariat requires 
continuity and while proposing the Committee Manager/Committee Manager Support from 
BIS, continuity of Officer for the proposed role should also be kept in mind. 
10.4.4.5 The secretariat is responsible for monitoring, reporting, and ensuring active progress 
of work, and shall use its utmost endeavour to bring the work to an early and satisfactory 
conclusion.  
10.4.4.6 The secretariat is responsible for ensuring that ISO/IEC Directives and decisions of 
the ISO Council /IEC Council Board and ISO Technical Management Board/IEC 
Standardization Board are followed. 
 
10.4.4.7 The secretariat shall ensure the timely execution of the following: 
 
a) Launch of CIB ballots and the treatment of the comments received; 
b) preparation of meeting including: 
1) establishment of the agenda and arranging for its distribution; 
2) arranging for distribution of all documents on the agenda, including reports 
of the secretariat and the working group, and indicating all other documents

--- Page 64 ---
54 
 
which are necessary for discussion during the meeting; and 
3) preparation of compilation of comments on documents which appear on the 
agenda. 
c) recording of discussions taken in a meeting and making these decisions available for 
confirmation during the meeting as resolutions; 
d) preparation of the minutes of the meetings; 
e) preparation of reports to the parent committee (SC Secretariat);                                                          
f) preparation of enquiry drafts and final draft International Standards; 
g) registering documents at various stages with the ISO Central Secretariat/IEC Central 
Office; and 
h) ensure project management and maintenance of timelines of all projects under the 
committee. 
    
NOTE – Refer to the latest ISO/IEC Directives Part 1 for roles and responsibilities of Committee 
Manager, ISO/Secretary IEC. 
 
10.4.4.8 Each secretariat shall work in close liaison with the Chairperson of its Technical 
Committee or Subcommittee and its Project Manager and with the members of the Technical 
Committee regarding its activities, including those of its Subcommittees and Working Groups.  
 
10.4.5 Relinquishing Secretariat Responsibility 
 
10.4.5.1 If it becomes clear to the responsible Sectional Committee that the maintenance of an 
ISO/IEC Technical Committee or Subcommittee Secretariat can no longer be justified, a letter 
should be sent to the Central Secretariat of ISO/Central Office of IEC after taking approval of 
DG, BIS giving a minimum of 12 months' notice stating the following points: 
 
a) BIS/Indian National Committee has decided to relinquish the Secretariat of the 
committee in question. 
b)  The ISO/IEC is asked to canvass members to find an alternative holder of the 
secretariat. 
c)  BIS is prepared, in the interests of a smooth transition, to continue with secretariat 
responsibilities for up to one year, until a new holder is found. 
d)  If no secretariat can be found the Office of CEO will initiate further steps to wind up 
its affairs. If a Subcommittee secretariat is to be relinquished the same actions to be 
taken, but the correspondence should be advised to the secretariat of the parent 
international technical committee. The office of the CEO should be kept informed of 
the actions taken. 
    NOTE – Refer the latest ISO/IEC Directives Part 1.

--- Page 65 ---
55 
 
10.5 Guidance on Processing of ISO/IEC Draft Standards for Casting Vote on Ballots 
 
10.5.1 General 
 
10.5.1.1 International Standards are developed through a sequence of project stages as follows: 
a) Preliminary Stage [Preliminary Work Item (PWI)] 
b) Proposal Stage [New Work Item Proposal (NP)] 
c) Preparatory Stage [Working Draft (WD)] 
d) Committee Stage (CD) 
e) Enquiry Stage [DIS(ISO)/ CDV(IEC)] 
f) Approval Stage (FDIS) 
g) Publication Stage (ISO, IEC or ISO/IEC) 
 
PWI, NP, CD, DIS/CDV and FDIS are referred to the P-members and O-members for voting. 
Member countries are expected to examine these documents in the light of national work and 
trade interests.  
 
10.5.1.2 Votes submitted by BIS shall be explicit: 
 
1) A positive/approval vote may be accompanied by editorial and/or technical comments, 
on the understanding that the secretariat in consultation with the Chairperson of the 
Technical Committee or Subcommittee and the project leader would decide how to deal 
with them. However, in case of FDIS, if the national body votes affirmatively, it may 
only submit editorial comments (if any). 
2) If BIS finds DIS unacceptable, it shall vote negatively and state the technical reasons. It 
may indicate that the acceptance of specified technical modifications will change its 
negative/disapproval vote to one of approval, but it shall not cast an affirmative vote 
which is conditional on acceptance of modifications. 
3) In case a P-member has limited interest or competence or is unable to build a national 
viewpoint in view of conflicting views amongst its stakeholders in some subjects of the 
concerned TC, BIS can then abstain at the time of voting. 
 
10.5.1.3 Since International Standards have been recognized under WTO-TBT agreement as 
instruments for removal of technical barriers to trade, casting vote on a particular document 
will have implications when such standards are adopted under the WTO standards code. If a 
document is approved by India at this stage, it should be clearly understood that it would be 
incumbent upon the country to implement such an international standard under the provisions 
of the WTO-TBT Agreement.  
 
10.5.2 Constitution of Special Panels and Consultation on Draft Documents 
 
10.5.2.1 It is recommended that Sectional Committees may constitute small panels for 
consultation on ISO/IEC draft international standards/documents and questions submitted for 
voting. The relevant documents shall be circulated to the members of the panel constituted for

--- Page 66 ---
56 
 
the purpose and to any other expert/stakeholder deemed necessary to obtain comments on the 
documents. 
 
10.5.2.2 In order to stimulate response from members of panel/other stakeholders on the 
ISO/IEC draft/documents, it is encouraged that along with the FDIS/DIS(CDV)/CD a short 
summary be sent by the secretariat informing on the following aspects: 
 
a) Whether an Indian standard corresponding to the FDIS/DIS(CDV)/CD exists or not; 
b) If it exists, does it differ significantly from the FDIS/DIS(CDV)/CD and if so, in what 
major respects; 
c) Is it intended/desirable to revise the Indian Standard to align with the 
FDIS/DIS(CDV)/CD or is it intended /desirable to suggest change in the 
FDIS/DIS(CDV)/CD; and 
d) If no Indian Standard exists, is it intended/required to prepare an Indian Standard based 
on the FDIS/DIS(CDV)/CD. 
 
10.5.3 Where India votes in favour of a new work item proposal it is recommended to nominate 
an expert/experts to participate in the development of the standard. Such experts are nominated 
to Working Groups or other similar groups of ISO/IEC by the NSB/National committee (i.e., 
BIS). They have to contribute to the development of international standards with their 
individual knowledge and expertise and not the national viewpoint, the requirement of which 
comes at a later stage at the time of ballot of Draft International Standard (DIS) in ISO/ 
Committee Draft for Vote (CDV) in IEC. However, the experts shall keep national perspective 
in consideration and keep the BIS NMC informed of the progress of work/developments. 
 
10.5.4 Analysis of NP, CD, DIS/CDV and FDIS  
 
10.5.4.1 On receiving the comments from the experts of the Panel/other stakeholders, these 
shall be analyzed and suitably edited. The observations may be of following nature: 
 
a) approval of document as presented; 
b) approval of the document with editorial or other comments; 
c) disapproval of the document due to some technical reasons, citing the reasons; or 
d) Abstaining the ballot (applicable when a national opinion or consensus on the subject 
could not be evolved). 
10.5.4 The documents along with the edited comments should be sent to the Chairperson of the 
concerned Sectional Committee (that is the NMC) for approval before casting the ballot. It is 
the responsibility of the Head of the Department for casting the ballot. The head of the 
department shall monitor and ensure timely voting for Technical Committees and 
Subcommittees where India is a P-member.  
10.5.5 In case of difference in comments on document, the issue shall be referred to the 
convener of the panel/Chairperson of Sectional Committee for his/her opinion.

--- Page 67 ---
57 
 
10.5.6 Where on examination it is felt that comments may be required to be sent on documents 
originating from committees where India/BIS is an O member, a similar procedure may be 
followed in soliciting comments, finalizing India’s viewpoint and forwarding the same to 
ISO/IEC as comments on document. 
10.6 Participation in Meetings of Technical Committees/Subcommittees/Working Groups 
and other such Committees of ISO/IEC 
 
10.6.1 India has the right to participate in committees where it is a P or O-member. Apart from 
voting/commenting on drafts and other documents, participation in development of ISO/IEC 
standards can be either as delegates to Technical Committee/Subcommittee plenary meetings 
or as nominated experts in Working Groups of ISO/IEC Technical committee/subcommittees. 
 
10.6.2 Indian experts who are nominated in Working groups/Task Forces etc of ISO/IEC are 
expected to actively involve themselves and contribute in the work of the Working group/Task 
force and attend meetings of these groups. Experts nominated in Working Groups are expected 
to act in their individual capacity while developing/drafting standards in the Working Groups. 
However, they are required to inform the NMC of their contribution and progress of the work. 
Participating in Working Groups provide the right opportunity to and are critical in exerting the 
right influence in the development of the international standards right from the beginning. 
 
10.6.3 Guidelines for Nominating Experts in Working Group (WG) 
 
The following along with applicable guidelines issued by IR&TISD from time to time shall be 
followed: 
 
a) Nomination of experts in a Working Group shall be a decision of the concerned NMC and with 
the approval of its Chairperson. In case the Chairperson of the Sectional Committee, that is the 
NMC, is to be nominated, this shall be recommended by the NMC and approved by the 
Chairperson of the concerned Division Council. 
b) Any member of the concerned NMC (or its Subcommittee/Panel/Working Group) shall be 
eligible for consideration. 
c) While nominating the experts, the following shall be given due consideration: 
i) The knowledge and expertise of the expert in the subject area,  
ii) Willingness of the individual to fulfill the responsibilities and expectations and 
commitment to devote ample time for such purpose and of their organization (or 
the individual in case of experts in individual capacity) to provide necessary 
resources for the same, and 
iii) BIS officer shall normally not be nominated as an expert unless adequately justified based on 
one’s experience and specific subject knowledge. BIS officer shall be assigned the role of a 
Document Monitor of the relevant Working Group, where applicable, for the purpose of 
monitoring the progress of work and activities and have access documents.

--- Page 68 ---
58 
 
10.6.4 Guidelines for approval of Indian Delegation to ISO/IEC Meetings  
 
The procedure to be followed in processing the approval of Indian delegation to ISO/IEC 
Technical Committee/Subcommittee meetings involve two main steps and follow the guidelines 
issued by IR&TISD in this regard: 
i) Proposing the names of the delegates, and 
ii) Obtaining approval of the delegation. 
 
10.6.4.1 The composition of the delegation is decided by the concerned Sectional Committee 
(NMC) from amongst its members or members of the relevant Panel/Working Group, based on 
(a) subject of the drafts under discussion/consideration in the ISO/IEC committee, (b) the 
available expertise in the NMC on such subjects, (c) the number of meetings involved which 
may comprise Technical Committee/Subcommittee plenaries and/or Working Group meetings 
being held in parallel and requiring India’s participation, (d) India’s vote on ballots (particularly 
if negative vote has been cast or substantive technical comments have been sent) and our 
proposed interventions during the meeting, and (e) the resources involved  in funding the 
foreign visit. In case the Chairperson of the Sectional Committee is being nominated as part of 
delegation approval of Division Council Chairperson shall be taken. 
 
10.6.4.2 While selecting the delegates, the Sectional Committee (NMC) shall keep in view the 
following: 
 
a) knowledge and familiarity of the subject/scope coming up for discussion at the 
international meeting; 
b) familiarity with the rules and procedures of business transacted in the meeting; 
c) specialized technical knowledge and experience in the area, active participation in the 
ISO/IEC work through the corresponding national work; 
d) knowledge of Indian as well as complementary positions on the subject and 
associated ability to put forth Indian view point; 
e) willingness to work within the brief agreed to; 
f) 
agreement to bear all expenses for participation in the international meetings (except 
where provisions exist to bear the expenses of eligible delegates from 
BIS/Government funds); and 
g) expected active contribution in future in case of new member. 
 
10.6.4.3 In selecting BIS Officers in the delegation, the following shall be kept in mind and the 
guidelines issued by IR&TISD on foreign deputation from time to time, shall be followed: 
a) In technical committees of ISO/IEC where India holds the secretariat, Committee 
Manager/Committee Manager Support/Secretary of the concerned committees shall 
be nominated for the technical committee meetings. For participation in other 
ISO/IEC technical committee meetings, preferably the Member Secretary of

--- Page 69 ---
59 
 
corresponding NMC should be considered and the delegation proposal would be 
processed in accordance with the internal policies/guidelines of BIS. 
b) Officers without technical background or other technical officers having inadequate 
technical exposure to the related subject should not be recommended to attend the 
ISO/IEC technical committee meetings. 
 
10.6.4.4 The nodal department shall seek the approval of the Competent Authority for the 
outside delegation through IR&TISD, after ensuring compliance to above. On approval, the 
nodal department shall inform the members of the Indian delegation. Before proceeding for the 
meeting, the delegation shall be briefed of the stand and views to be expressed in the meetings.

--- Page 70 ---
60 
 
ANNEX A 
(Clause 6.4) 
GUIDELINES ON REPLYING TO QUERIES ON INDIAN STANDARDS AND 
CERTIFICATION MARKING 
 
A-1 Queries normally asked to BIS relating to standards and clarifications, interpretations, 
deviations, etc, are usually from a variety of organizations, such as Govt Departments, 
especially those connected with technical matters, purchasing departments and agencies, 
customs, industries, laboratories and so on. The queries can be of a simple nature such as factual 
details of a standard, comparative statements, nomenclature, test equipment, testing facilities, 
etc. More involved questions are in relation to fixation of certain requirements of standards, 
interpretations, relaxations and the like. Some queries are partly commercial in nature and 
cover selection of grades of materials or products, contractual stipulations and penalties. 
Similar questions are also asked in respect of certification marks activity. 
 
A-2 Replying to questions by the BIS and its individual officers might involve BIS in 
controversies. To avoid the said situation, the following decision was made at the 148th 
meeting of EC of erstwhile ISI to be followed: 
 
1) BIS technical departments may, in view of its competency to answer certain queries, 
continue to provide the necessary consultation. 
 
2) In replying to queries on standards, sufficient care shall be exercised. The following are the 
guidelines on this aspect: 
i) 
Simple queries seeking information on standards shall be answered with exact 
factual information, or the information seeker may be guided to the BIS website 
giving URL/link to reach the information sought, in case such information is 
available there. 
ii) Where technical opinion, deviations, relaxations, interpretations, etc, are 
involved, the Member Secretary of the technical committee shall not give his/her 
personal opinion. The Member Secretary shall base his/her reply on the 
recommendations of the concerned Sectional Committee or opinions expressed 
by the Chairperson or any other member having expertise in that aspect.   
iii) In case of a query suggestive of direct or indirect commercial or financial 
involvement, it should be borne in mind that BIS will not enter into interpretation 
of commercial or financial aspects. 
iv) No advice shall be given on commercial aspects like rates for the supply of 
materials or penalty for supplies not conforming to the specifications. 
 
3) In answering queries about certification marking, in addition to the guidelines covered 
in 2 above, it should be referred to concerned certification department.

--- Page 71 ---
61 
 
ANNEX B 
(Clause 7.7.2) 
ROLE OF CHAIRPERSON OF SECTIONAL COMMITTEE 
 
B-1 The Chairperson of a Sectional Committee has the overall responsibility for the 
management of the committee, including its subcommittees, panels and working groups. The 
duty of the Chairperson is to guide all the facets of the technical activity assigned to the 
committee. 
 
B-2 Responsibilities of a Sectional Committee Chair includes the following: 
 
a) Leading meetings effectively and fairly by directing participants and experts towards 
consensus, making sure that all views receive equal consideration and treatment. 
 
b) Act purely in an impartial capacity, divesting of his/her organization’s point of view. 
 
c) Know and follow BIS standards development rules and procedures, ensuring that these 
are followed and that policy and strategic decisions and directions of BIS Governing 
Council/Standards Advisory Committee/Division Council are implemented by the 
Sectional Committee. 
 
d) Provide strategic directions to the committee’s work based on government and policy 
imperatives, state-of-the-art of relevant technologies, consumer perspectives, status of 
quality infrastructure, etc. 
 
e) Foster cooperation with other relevant BIS committees and with other relevant Standards 
Development organizations in the country. 
 
f) Develop and implement the committee’s strategic plan/standards road-map. 
 
g) To participate in the training of technical committee Chairs/conveners and 
members/experts, including in international standardization, that are regularly held and 
offered by BIS. 
 
h) To take the responsibility of project management in the committee (along with the 
Member Secretary) which is fundamental to ensure that stakeholder needs and 
expectations are met in terms of the availability of the standard and its timelines, and 
that the quality of the standards developed is met, and standardization resources are 
efficiently used (that of members, other contributing organizations and BIS). This 
would involve planning, scheduling target dates, assigning resources and 
responsibilities and monitoring the progress. 
 
j) Chairs should be aware of the roles and obligations of the members of technical

--- Page 72 ---
62 
 
committees to participate and contribute to the technical work of the committee and that 
the members persistently inactive are liable to be dropped from the committee. 
 
k) The role of the Chair in meetings is to be impartial, to make sure that all voices are 
heard and every view receives equal treatment, steer the discussions to a 
conclusion/decision and summarize the conversations if needed, ensure that agenda is 
followed and completed in time, help in dealing with any difficult situations that may 
arise and diffuse conflicts and tensions and set the example in conduct.  
 
m) Provide formal approval to documents on behalf of the committee and on other matters 
as may be required from time to time, on priority. 
 
n) Be aware of the IT tools, e-applications and other resources, including access to various 
documents, that are available to technical committees and to effectively use/apply these. 
 
p) To guide participation in international standardization work, evolve national viewpoints 
on international documents and issues in the committee, facilitate decisions on 
delegations to international meetings and expert representation in international 
committees and lead international delegations when required/decided. To be aware of 
rules and procedures of international standardization work in ISO/IEC.

--- Page 73 ---
63 
 
ANNEX C 
                                                     (Clause 7.10) 
GUIDELINES FOR PARTICIPATION IN THE TECHNICAL COMMITTEE WORK 
OF BIS 
 
C-1 All organizations represented in a technical work of BIS shall be conscious of the national 
role they play in the preparation of standards. They shall nominate the best available expertise 
for this work and ensure that their nominees are provided all necessary resources for their 
effective and active participation in the technical work of BIS, are fully briefed, and utilize all 
opportunities to express their organization’s viewpoints in the BIS fora. For continuity of 
participation, it shall be ensured that representatives once nominated are continued as long as 
possible and changes where inevitable are proceeded smoothly and communicated to Member 
Secretary/BIS without delay. Organizations are also suggested to encourage the participation 
of young professionals and to ensure gender balance while nominating representatives. The 
committee members are strongly encouraged to attend the training programmes for technical 
committee members organized by BIS so that they have a clear understanding of the processes 
and procedures and are able to effectively participate and contribute to committee work. 
 
C-2 Where an organization that has been offered representation in a BIS technical committee 
feels that it has limited interest in the scope of activity of the committee it shall communicate 
so to the Member Secretary of the Committee/BIS before accepting the representation. 
 
C-3 Organizations participating in the technical work of the BIS may also consider initiating 
wherever possible, formal standardization activity within the organization that would, amongst 
other things, aid participation and act as permanent liaison with BIS on all standardization 
matters and shall coordinate adoption and implementation of national standards. 
 
C-4 Organizations representing the interests of a group/association/federation may ensure that 
all constituent members (whose interest is being represented) are consulted and kept informed 
of the committee work. 
 
C-5 All expenses related to the nominees for participating in this activity are to be borne by the 
participating organizations. 
 
C-6 Authorities nominating representatives as members of technical committee of the BIS, 
should nominate two representatives one to be known as the ‘Principal member’ and the other 
as the ’Alternate member’, subject to the following: 
a) Generally, one representative shall attend the meeting but if the organization so desires 
both the principal and alternate may attend the meeting. 
b) Only the principal representative shall have the right to vote on any issue, if required. 
c) In the absence of the principal representative, the alternate representative may exercise 
the right to vote. 
d) All documents concerned with the work of the technical committee shall be sent to both 
the representatives.

--- Page 74 ---
64 
 
e) Organizations may, if they so choose, nominate experts by designation instead of by 
name. 
f) In exceptional circumstances where a case is made out on the basis of regional 
representation or representation of special interests/expertise within any organization, 
more than one alternative may be accepted. However, organizations are allowed to 
nominate a young professional as the second alternate. 
g) Only the designated principal/alternate members can attend sectional committee 
meetings. In case of their absence, their representatives can attend the meetings. 
However, BIS should be given prior intimation in such cases. In any case, no more than 
two representatives from one organization can attend the committee meetings (except 
when the third participant from the organization is a ‘Young Professional’). 
 
C-7 Comments on documents at any stage, as well as on published Indian Standards, though 
are welcome at all times, members are requested to send them well in advance for inclusion in 
the agenda in order to consider them in the meeting. Comments received very late or brought 
along for tabling during the meeting will be liable not to be considered as other members have 
not had the opportunity to deliberate these within their organization to form their viewpoint 
and may not be able to put forth their views at a short notice. 
 
C-8 In case there is continual failure to contribute either through correspondence or by 
attending meetings for three consecutive technical committee meetings by a member, the 
membership of such organizations may be recommended for withdrawal.

--- Page 75 ---
65 
 
ANNEX D 
(Clause 7.10) 
BIS CODE OF ETHICS FOR TECHNICAL COMMITTEE MEMBERS 
 
D-1 This Code of Ethics is an obligation for participation in BIS technical committees that 
work in the framework of the BIS Act, 2016, BIS Rules, 2018 and the procedures outlined in the 
Manual for Standards Formulation. This Code shall be brought to the notice of members of BIS 
technical committees on their nomination to a committee and in committee meetings as a protocol 
to remind all participants of the expectation that they will respect and comply with it. 
 
It is the responsibility of all those that are involved in technical committee work to ensure 
compliance with the BIS statutes and procedures and to raise concerns or report, in a timely 
manner, if they perceive a case of behaviour that is not in accordance with this Code of Ethics. 
It is also the responsibility of participants in BIS technical work to also identify and escalate 
for rapid resolution of disputes. 
 
D-2 All technical committee members and their Chairs and Conveners shall: 
 
Respect Others 
1) Respect others and conduct oneselves in a professional manner. Behave in a polite and 
respectful manner with those present in the meeting. 
2) Make an effort to hear and try to understand the diverse technical, scientific or other 
views that may emanate in the technical committees. 
3) Embrace an attitude of compromise and consensus building in developing Indian 
Standards. Be ready to accept and respect consensus decisions of committees. 
4) Refrain from bringing back topics from previous meeting agenda for discussions unless 
new and relevant information has emerged. Also refrain from providing the same view 
point already presented in the discussions in a meeting. 
5) Respect the fact that individual skills vary from person to person. Speak clearly and 
slowly and avoid using language that is difficult to comprehend. 
 
Be Ethical 
1) Be ethical, act in good faith and with due care and diligence. 
2) Respect the applicable statutes and procedures, without prejudice against any. 
3) Refrain from speaking in a disrespectful or threatening manner or in a tone that is 
offensive to other participants in the course of debates and discussions. 
4) Issues shall be raised in an objective manner – no personal reference or innuendo be 
made to any person or meeting participant associated with the matter being raised. 
5) Refrain from providing misleading or incorrect information or withholding information 
that may be necessary for a full, fair and complete consideration of the issues concerned. 
6) Be fair to all and not give preferential treatment to any person or group of persons or 
appear to do so.

--- Page 76 ---
66 
 
7) Not harass, threaten or coerce fellow participants in an effort to persuade them to 
support or oppose issues. 
8) Committee chairs, conveners and project leaders should act in a neutral manner, desist 
from giving personal opinion and divest themselves from their organizational views 
and act in a neutral manner. 
 
Act for Net National Benefit 
 
1) Respect that Indian Standards are for the net benefit of the country and keep national 
interests before individual considerations. Therefore, accept consensus decisions in 
broader interest. 
 
Participate Actively 
1) Actively participate in standardization activities, contribute to the work of committees and 
uphold your roles and responsibilities. Participate in meetings regularly and respond in a timely 
manner to any task assigned by the committee or to the communications on issues related to the 
committee. Keep the time targets of completion of items of work in mind while providing 
contributions and conducting discussions. 
 
Respect Confidentiality 
1) Safeguard privacy rights of others and respect confidentiality. 
2) Do not share information provided for the purpose of technical work of committees with others 
without the formal permission of the person/organization sharing such information. 
3) Do not share with the media or make public the discussions and decisions taken in committees. 
4) Do not speak on behalf of the committee or on behalf of BIS unless so authorized by BIS. 
 
Act in a Professional Manner 
1) Engage and consult within your organization to ensure they are informed, and that the 
organization’s views are represented. 
2) Come well prepared with the agenda items for fruitful and to the point discussions in 
the meeting. 
3) Be prompt in arriving at the meeting and returning from breaks. 
4) Participate in training activities associated with your role in BIS committees. 
 
Respect Patent, IPR and Copyright 
1) Disclose any known information on intellectual property or patent rights that will affect 
the development of any Indian Standard. 
2) Protect BIS copyright and refrain from sharing or reproducing or storing any 
information that has been accessed in connection with technical committee work, 
including those related to international standards development.

--- Page 77 ---
67 
 
ANNEX E 
(Clause 7.13.5) 
LIST OF ESSENTIAL DOCUMENTS AND MATERIALS REQUIRED  
BY MEMBER SECRETARY FOR REFERENCE 
 
 
1) Indian Standards (current version as well as earlier version), with all amendments issued to the 
current version, arranged committee wise relating to his/her assigned work. 
2) Agenda/Minutes of relevant technical committees handled by him/her. 
3) Up-to-date set of scopes and composition of technical committees under his/her jurisdiction. 
4) Proceedings of the concerned Division Council. 
5) Basic and reference Indian Standards related to the work of technical committees assigned to 
him/her, such as IS 2 ‘Rules for Rounding off Numerical Values’, IS 12 ‘Guide for Drafting 
and Presentation of Indian Standards’ and IS 1250 ‘Graphic Technology — Symbols for Text 
Proof Correction’. 
6) His/her departments' Programme of Work. 
7) Programme of Work of other Divisions/technical committees, which are of relevance for 
maintaining liaison. 
8) Relevant ISO, IEC or other standards used for referencing/consultation. 
9) Any technical document/book used for referencing/consultation. 
10) Guidelines for participants in technical committee work. 
11) ISO/IEC work procedures/technical directives/guides. 
12) Position of work of corresponding ISO/IEC technical committee. 
13) Latest version of Manual for Standards Formulation (including amendments, if any). 
14) BIS Act, Rules and Regulations. 
15) Copies of statutory regulations/rules/standards related to the work assigned to him/her. 
     NOTE – These may be maintained in soft form wherever possible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
`

--- Page 78 ---
68 
 
ANNEX F 
(Clause 8.2.3) 
PROFORMA FOR ANALYSIS OF NEW SUBJECT PROPOSALS FOR TAKING UP 
AS NEW WORK ITEM PROPOSAL 
 
After receipt of proposal, the subject shall be analyzed by the Member Secretary as per the 
following chart in which point rating will be given for each element based on the following 
three degrees: 
 
 
High-3  
 
Medium-2 
 
Low-1 
While giving point rating, Member Secretary shall take into account the inputs contained in the 
Proforma received from the proposer. Elements, which are not applicable shall not be given 
any point. In the final analysis only the maximum points for all those elements which are 
applicable will be counted. The priority of the subject shall be evaluated based on the following 
percentage score: 
 
Priority to be assigned 
Percentage score 
I 
>85% 
II 
>75 and up to 85 
III 
From 65 to 75 
Reject 
Below 65 
 
NOTE – An example to decide the priority based on the percentage score is given in Annex. 
 
Doc. No./Title: 
 
Subject: 
 
Sectional Committee: 
 
ANALYSIS FOR APPROVAL OF NEW SUBJECT 
 
Sl. No. Elements 
High 
Medium 
Low 
Remarks 
1 
Futuristic 
 
 
 
 
 
a) National priorities/Policy 
imperative of Govt. 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Bearing on Govt. legislation/ 
regulations 
 
 
 
 
 
c) Technology upgradation/transfer 
 
 
 
 
 
d) Harmonization with international 
standards/practices 
 
 
 
 
 
e) Addressing gaps in standardization  
 
 
 
 
f) Support upscaling of innovation

--- Page 79 ---
69 
 
2. 
Economic Importance 
 
 
 
 
 
a) Foster/impact domestic trade 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Export potential/Import 
substitution 
 
 
 
 
 
c) Resource conservation/Energy 
conservation 
 
 
 
 
 
d) Variety reduction/ 
Interchangeability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. 
Social Importance 
 
 
 
 
 
a) Health and safety 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Consumer protection 
 
 
 
 
 
c) Support disadvantaged group 
 
 
 
 
 
d) Mass consumption 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e) Environment protection/Waste 
utilization 
 
 
 
 
 
f) Contributes to United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals 
 
 
 
 
 
g) Gender responsive 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  
Others 
 
 
 
 
 
a) Certifiability 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Self-regulation 
 
 
 
 
 
c) Other aspects not otherwise 
covered (To be specified) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            Justification of MS - 
 
 
 
                                                                                        Signature _______________________ 
                                              Name & Designation of MS _______________________ 
 
 
The above proposal shall be placed before the concerned Sectional Committee for its 
consideration. 
The 
concerned 
Sectional 
committee 
should 
then 
recommend 
approval/disapproval of a new subject and the subject should be then put up to the Division 
Council concerned for its consideration and decision.

--- Page 80 ---
70 
 
Example 1 - Subject- Bullet resistance jacket- Performance requirement 
 
Sl. No. Elements 
High 
Medium 
Low 
Remarks 
1. 
Futuristic 
 
 
 
 
 
a) National priorities/Policy 
imperative 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Bearing on Govt. legislation/ 
regulations 
 
 
 
 
 
c) Technology upgradation/transfer 
 
 
 
 
 
d) Harmonization with international 
standards/practices 
NA 
 
 
 
 
e) Addressing gaps in standardization NA 
 
 
 
 
f) Support upscaling of innovation 
NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
Economic Importance 
 
 
 
 
 
a) Foster/impact domestic trade 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Export potential/Import 
substitution 
 
 
 
 
 
c) Resource conservation/Energy 
conservation 
NA 
 
 
 
 
d) Variety reduction/ 
Interchangeability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. 
Social Importance 
 
 
 
 
 
a) Health and safety 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Consumer protection 
 
 
 
 
 
c) Support disadvantaged group 
NA 
 
 
 
 
d) Mass consumption 
 
NA 
 
 
 
 
e) Environment protection/Waste 
utilization 
NA 
 
 
 
 
f) Contributes to United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals 
NA 
 
 
 
 
g) Gender responsive 
NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  
Others 
 
 
 
 
 
a) Certifiability 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Self-regulation 
NA 
 
 
 
 
c) Other aspects not otherwise 
covered (To be specified) 
NA

--- Page 81 ---
71 
 
Total number of application elements = 9 
Maximum score- 9 × 3= 27 
Total score obtained- 9 × 3= 27 
 
Percentage score- 27 × 100 = 100 % 
                                  27             
 
So the subject will fall under Priority I. 
 
Example 2 - Subject- Bolting cloth for screen printing applications 
 
Sl. No. Elements 
High 
Medium 
Low 
Remarks 
1 
Futuristic 
 
 
 
 
 
a) National priorities/Policy 
imperative 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Bearing on Govt. legislation/ 
regulations 
NA 
 
 
 
 
c) Technology upgradation/transfer 
NA 
 
 
 
 
d) Harmonization with international 
standards/practices 
NA 
 
 
 
 
e) Addressing gaps in standardization NA 
 
 
 
 
f) Support upscaling of innovation 
NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
Economic Importance 
 
 
 
 
 
a) Foster/impact domestic trade 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Export potential/Import 
substitution 
 
 
 
 
 
c) Resource conservation/Energy 
conservation 
NA 
 
 
 
 
d) Variety reduction/ 
Interchangeability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. 
Social Importance 
 
 
 
 
 
a) Health and safety 
NA 
 
 
 
 
b) Consumer protection 
 
 
 
 
 
c) Support disadvantaged group 
NA 
 
 
 
 
d) Mass consumption 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e) Environment protection/Waste 
utilization 
NA 
 
 
 
 
f) Contributes to United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals 
NA 
 
 
 
 
g) Gender responsive 
NA

--- Page 82 ---
72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  
Others 
 
 
 
 
 
a) Certifiability 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Self-regulation 
 
NA 
 
 
 
 
c) Other aspects not otherwise 
covered (To be specified) 
NA 
 
 
 
 
Total number of application elements = 7 
Maximum score- 7 × 3= 21 
Total score obtained- 2 × 3 + 5 × 2 = 16 
 
Percentage score- 16 × 100 = 76.2 % 
                                  21             
 
So, the subject will fall under Priority II.

--- Page 83 ---
73 
 
ANNEX G 
(Clause 9.3.4) 
TYPICAL FORMAT OF AGENDA OF SECTIONAL COMMITTEE MEETING 
 
 
AGENDA 
 
TITLE OF SECTIONAL COMMITTEE/       Sl. Number of the Meeting: 
SUBCOMMITTEE/PANEL/WORKING GROUP 
 
Date and Day:                                                                          Time: 
Venue: 
 
Chairperson: 
Member Secretary: 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
 
Item 0 WELCOME AND OPENING REMARKS 
 
Item 1 CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES OF THE PREVIOUS MEETING 
(Formal confirmation of the record of discussions held during the previous meeting to be taken) 
 
Item 2 SCOPE AND COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE 
[Latest composition to be brought to the information of committee besides review of the same, 
as the case may be. 
Requests received for representation on the committee to be considered. 
Assessment of contribution of members of subordinate committees (based on evaluation made 
by Member Secretary) to be considered.] 
 
Item 3 DRAFT STANDARDS/AMENDMENTS FOR FINALIZATION 
[Necessary particulars of the drafts coming up for finalization together with summary of 
comments received when not circulated earlier be included in the agenda (along with 
recommendations thereon by concerned subordinate committees, if any) to facilitate their 
orderly consideration.]

--- Page 84 ---
74 
 
Item 4 DRAFT STANDARDS/AMENDMENTS FOR APPROVAL FOR WIDE 
CIRCULATION 
(As in Item 3.) 
 
Item 5 DRAFTS UNDER PREPARATION 
(Various drafts currently under preparation, status of which is to be reported/discussed.) 
 
Item 6 COMMENTS ON PUBLISHED STANDARDS 
(Comments/queries/proposals for changes received on published Indian Standards, to be 
considered. 
 
Recommendations from Technical Evaluation of Standards carried out by Member Secretary 
and others, and periodic review of standards, to be considered.) 
 
Item 7 NEW SUBJECTS 
(Various proposal for formulation of standards on new subjects received since last meeting.) 
 
Item 8 TECHNICAL ISSUES 
(Various technical issues relevant to/of interest to the committee including the matters 
transcending multiple areas within the committee.) 
 
Item 9 INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES 
(Information relating to work of corresponding ISO/IEC Technical Committees of relevance, 
covering all NWIP, drafts (CD, DIS/CDV, FDIS) and possible Indian comments on the same, 
possible subjects in which India may propose new work items, etc. 
 
Specifically include status of Indian membership/degree of participation in corresponding 
ISO/IEC committees, meetings held, Indian delegations participated and outcome, etc. 
 
Proposal for participation of an Indian delegation in ISO/IEC meeting being held. 
 
Reporting by experts nominated in various ISO/IEC Working Groups. 
 
Reporting work in progress for those International Standards which have corresponding dual 
numbered Indian Standards.) 
 
Item 10 PROGRAMME OF WORK  
[Periodic Review of Indian Standards to consider reaffirmation/revision/withdrawal of

--- Page 85 ---
75 
 
published Indian Standards. 
To allot work relating to work programme amongst participating interests. 
R&D work under progress or to be considered. (This may be included as a separate item of the 
agenda) 
Training programmes for members, experts etc.] 
 
Item 11 ISSUES ARISING OUT OF THE PREVIOUS MEETINGS 
(Outstanding issues, follow up of the decision taken during the previous meeting etc, not 
covered elsewhere in the agenda to be reported.) 
 
Item 12 DATE AND PLACE OF NEXT MEETING 
  
Item 13 ANY OTHER BUSINESS 
 
NOTE – This is a representative list of items only. While preparing the agenda for a Sectional committee 
meeting, Member Secretary may modify the sequence for items or incorporate additional items, as per requirement. 
Same items with suitable modifications would apply for a Subcommittee meeting.

--- Page 86 ---
76 
 
ANNEX H 
(Clause 9.3.7) 
GUIDELINES FOR CONDUCT OF VIRTUAL MEETINGS  
(INCLUDING HYBRID MEETINGS) 
 
H-1 In order to facilitate increased stakeholder engagement and to further the goal of better 
project management and coordination of the technical committee work, ensure faster and more 
efficient standards development process, conducting virtual meetings/hybrid meetings of all 
types of technical committees are permitted. 
 
H-2 BEFORE THE MEETING 
a) The Member Secretary should: 
1) circulate the meeting notice and agenda including the option to participate remotely, 
in case of a hybrid meeting; 
2) schedule the meeting on the online meeting platform and share meeting link with 
the committee members (including invitees, if any); 
3) test the connection with the IT team well in advance of the meeting; use of two 
computers in the meeting room to run the web conference is suggested (one to host 
the meeting, the other to join the meeting as a participant and give the presentations), 
this allows one person to manage the meeting (answering chat messages, muting 
participants, etc) and another person to give a presentation without being distracted 
by control panel of the conference platform;  
4) in case a hybrid meeting is being hosted outside BIS, check with the host of the 
arrangements to run the web conference; and 
5) send any document/submission /presentations to be discussed during the meeting in 
advance to all members. 
b) The meeting host should (in the case where a hybrid meeting is being hosted by another 
organization) respond to the request for remote meeting participation from the BIS 
ensuring that the necessary equipment such as a computer with browser, acceptable 
internet speed, meeting room with a sound system that allows microphone input and 
speaker output is available. 
c) The meeting participants should: 
1) confirm participation in the meeting, 
2) read the virtual participation guidelines, and 
3) test one’s web connection well in advance of remote participation. 
 
H-3 DURING THE MEETING 
 
a) The Member Secretary should: 
1) start the virtual meeting well in advance so as to enable the participants to login in

--- Page 87 ---
77 
 
advance and in time; 
2) ensure that those participating virtually are authorized individuals and that their 
attendance is noted in the attendance sheet; 
3) ensure that the meeting rules are projected on a slide at the commencement of 
meetings; 
4) ensure that a round of introduction around the table is conducted at the beginning of 
the meeting so that everyone knows who (organization and name) is participating 
(particularly in case of hybrid meetings as to who is participating physically and who 
remotely);  
5) in case meetings need to be recorded, inform the participants before the meeting that 
the meeting is being recorded; 
6) remind the participants: 
i) that the meeting will continue even if the remote connection breaks for 
any of the participants; 
ii) to raise hand or indicate in online chat box when desiring to speak and 
speak only when asked to; 
iii) when speaking, individuals should every time start by identifying 
themselves; 
iv) that speakers are to speak one at a time, be brief, clear and speak slowly; 
v) to mute their lines when not speaking; and 
vi) that physical and remote participants have equal rights (in case of hybrid 
meetings); and 
7)   attempt to involve participants who have joined virtually, throughout the meeting 
(use of online chat which can be saved). 
 
b) The meeting host should ensure the necessary technology, equipment and support during 
meeting – as detailed above. 
 
c) The meeting participants should: 
1) join the meeting in time and indicating the participants name and organization; 
2) when speaking, start by identifying his/her organization and his/her name; 
3) speak when asked to and one at a time, be brief, clear and speak slowly; 
4) mute one’s line when not speaking; 
5) raise hand or use the online chat function when wanting to speak; and 
6) use the chat function on the electronic meeting tool to comment, particularly when 
asked to indicate agreement/disagreement to a proposal or issue. 
 
H-4 AFTER THE MEETING 
 
The Member Secretary should download the participants list with details of duration of 
participation from the online meeting platform.

--- Page 88 ---
78

--- Page 89 ---
79

--- Page 90 ---
80