--- Page 1 ---
1 
REVIEW OF BIS ANNUAL REPORT 2017-18 
 
The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), the National Standard Body of India was established 
under the BIS Act 1986, assuming the functions of the erstwhile Indian Standards Institution 
(ISI). BIS is responsible for the harmonious development of the activities of standardization 
and quality certification of goods and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
 
The Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016, was published for general information in official 
gazette on 22 March 2016 and the Rules and Regulations under the Act are being framed. 
 
Major achievements of BIS during the year 2017-18, as reported in its Annual Report are 
summarized below: 
 
STANDARDIZATION 
 
The process of standards development adopted by BIS follows internationally accepted good 
standardization practices and is in compliance with the WTO-TBT code of good practice for 
preparation, adoption and application of standards. In the development of National 
Standards, BIS provides all interested stakeholders, with a neutral platform to come together 
and work towards common agreements. BIS currently provides a forum for 325 Sectional 
Committees, representing over a thousand experts from organized consumers and consumer 
bodies, regulatory and other government bodies, industries, scientists, technologists, testing 
organizations and individual experts. These committees work to develop consensus based 
voluntary National standards with stakeholder consultations. 
 
A total of 305 Technical committee meetings were held during 2017-18, to consider draft 
standards and related technical documents in detail. It is the policy of BIS to formulate Indian 
Standards on emerging technologies and to withdraw obsolete standards.  
 
During 2017-18, 735 (new 376 and revised 359) standards were formulated. The total 
number of standards in force, as on 31 March 2018 was 19294. 
 
CERTIFICATION 
 
During 2017-18, BIS operated the Product Certification Scheme under the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations framed there-under. Under this 
Certification scheme, a manufacturer of a particular product is given the self-marking rights 
of the BIS standards mark (ISI mark) on his product after ensuring that his product complies 
with the relevant Indian Standard. Presence of Standard Mark (popularly known as ISI mark) 
on a product indicates its conformity to the relevant Indian Standard. The certification scheme 
is voluntary in nature, except for 115 product standards that have been made mandatory by 
the Central Government on considerations of health and safety of the consumer. 
 
During the 2017-18, 4032 new licences were granted, which include 20 products covered for 
the first time under the scheme. The total number of Indian Standards which have been 
covered so far under BIS Certification Marks Scheme up to March 2018 was 964. The total 
number of operative licences as on 31 March 2017 was 33230 which increased to 34457 by 
March 2017.

--- Page 2 ---
2 
 
Surveillance 
 
In order to monitor the operation of licences, during the year, a total number of 12311 
inspections were carried out. In addition, about 24038 samples (including samples procured 
from market) were drawn for independent testing. 
 
Foreign Manufactures Certification Scheme (FMCS) 
 
BIS has been operating separate Scheme for foreign manufacturers. Under this Scheme, 
foreign manufacturers can seek certification from BIS for use of BIS Standard Mark on their 
product(s). During 2017-18, 169 licences were issued under FMCS, taking the total number 
of operative licences to 804 against 90 Indian Standards. The licences granted covered 
products such as steel & steel products; cement; PVC insulated cables; tyres & tubes for 
automotive vehicles; plastic feeding bottles; switchgear products; plugs & socket-outlets and 
switches; HDPE & UPVC Pipes; Infant milk formula; ac static energy meters etc. from about 
51 countries. 
 
Compulsory Registration Scheme (CRS) 
 
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), then known as  Department 
of Electronics & Information Technology (DeitY), in consultation with BIS, notified ‘Electronics 
and Information Technology Goods (Requirements for Compulsory Registration) Order, 
2012’ on 3 October 2012 mandating Compulsory Registration from BIS for 15 Electronics 
and Information Technology products based on its safety compliance to Indian Standards. A 
second Order was notified on 13 November 2014, bringing 15 more electronics and 
Information Technology products under the ambit of the Scheme. The Compulsory 
Registration Scheme is being operated by BIS under the BIS Act, 1986 and the Rules, framed 
thereunder for this purpose. 
 
The first Registration was granted by BIS in June 2013. As on 31 March 2018, BIS has 
granted 11068 registrations to manufacturers in various countries including domestic 
manufacturers. 
 
 
LABORATORY SERVICES 
 
In order to support the activities of the product certification marks scheme, BIS has 
established eight laboratories in the country to cater to the testing need of samples generated 
from Product Certification Scheme, beginning with the establishment of Central Laboratory 
at Sahibabad in 1962. Subsequently, four regional laboratories at Mohali, Kolkata, Mumbai 
and Chennai and three branch office laboratories at Patna, Bangalore and Guwahati were 
established. BIS laboratories have facilities for testing of products in chemical, 
microbiological, electrical and mechanical discipline.  
 
BIS labs have complete test facilities for 391 Indian Standards and partial test facilities for 
358 Indian Standards. During the year, the BIS laboratories tested 16936 samples of various 
products covered under BIS Certification. In addition, the Gold Referral Assaying Laboratory 
at Chennai has issued 3450 test reports during the year.

--- Page 3 ---
3 
 
Lab Recognition Scheme 
 
As the volume of work for testing of samples generated from product certification scheme is 
much larger than the available facilities and capacity in BIS labs, BIS has established 
Laboratory Recognition Scheme (LRS) for recognition of outside laboratories (OSLs). The 
services of such laboratories are utilized when it is economically not viable to develop test 
facilities in BIS labs or when BIS labs are overloaded. 
 
During 2017-18, 36 new labs were recognized and 05 labs were de-recognized. As on 31 
March 2018, the total number of operative BIS recognized labs were 210, which included 
reputed R&D organizations, technical institutions, Government labs and Private sector labs. 
Besides, services of 47 Government laboratories of specialized nature are utilized for 
different products, as and when required.   
 
To support the newly launched BIS Compulsory Registration Scheme, 47 outside labs are 
testing IT products, which were covered under Electronics and Information Technology 
Goods (Requirement for Compulsory Registration) Order, 2012 of Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY).  
 
 
HALLMARKING 
 
Hallmarking of gold jewellery was launched by BIS in April 2000 to provide third party 
assurance to consumers on the purity of gold jewellery or its fineness. The scheme for 
Hallmarking of silver jewellery/ artefacts was launched in October 2005. Under these Scheme, 
while the jewellers are granted licence to sell hallmarked jewellery, Assaying & Hallmarking 
(A&H) centres are recognized to assay the purity of the jewellery submitted by the licensed 
jeweller, along with declaration of purity.  
 
As on 31 March 2018, the number of operative licences for Hallmarking of gold and silver 
jewellery were 21580 and 1762 respectively. The number of operative BIS recognized A&H 
centres was 608. During the year, 4.17 crore articles of gold and silver jewellery/ artefacts 
were hallmarked.  
 
Hallmark of Gold Bullion/Coin 
 
Hallmarking of gold Bullion/Coin in the fineness of 999 & 995 by giving licence to 
refineries/Mint was started in October 2015. During 2017-18, two licences have been granted 
to the refineries for the hallmarking of gold Bullions/Coins. As on 31 March 2018, 14 licences 
have been granted to refineries/ India Government Mint for Gold bullion and coin.  
 
GOLD MONETIZATION SCHEME 
 
Government of India has launched Gold Monetization Scheme on 5 November 2015. BIS 
has played an important role in finalization and implementation of the Gold Monetization 
Scheme in association with Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance and 
Reserve Bank of India. Under the scheme A&H Centres recognized by BIS have been 
qualified to act as Collection and Purity Testing Centres (CPTC). So far 48 A&H centres and

--- Page 4 ---
4 
one Jeweller have been qualified to act as CPTC. The gold collected by CPTCs is to be 
refined by refineries licenced by BIS.  
 
Promotion of Hallmarking 
 
 
To promote hallmarking in the country and for effective consumer protection, awareness 
programmes are organized by BIS through its various Regional and Branch offices across 
the country. During 2017-18, 51 such jewellers’ awareness programmes were organized.  
 
 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM CERTIFICATION 
 
BIS is operating various Management Systems Certification schemes. As on 31 March 2018, 
843 Quality Management System Certification (QMS) licences, 196 Environmental 
Management Systems (EMS) Certification licences, 106 Occupational Health & Safety 
Management Systems (OHSMS) Certification licences, 02 Hazards Analysis and Critical 
Control Point (HACCP) stand-alone licences,  27 HACCP licences integrated with QMS, 21 
Food Safety Management System (FSMS) licences, 104 Service Quality Management 
System (SQMS) licences, 24 Energy Management System (EnMS) licences and one Medical 
Devices Management System (MDMS) licences were in operation. 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL 
ACTIVITIES 
AND 
TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION 
SERVICES 
 
BIS in its capacity as the National Standards Body of India, is a member of International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) and a member of International Electrotechnical 
Commission (IEC). BIS actively participates in the activities of these International bodies and 
is involved in development of International Standards as Participating (P) member or 
Observer (O) member on various Technical Committees and Sub-Committees; and 
nominates technical experts in Working Groups of these bodies. As on 31 March 2018, BIS 
is a ‘P’ member in 433 Technical Committees/ Subcommittees of ISO and 90 Technical 
Committees/Subcommittees 
of 
IEC, 
and 
‘O’ 
Member 
in 
216 
Technical 
Committees/Subcommittees of ISO and 72 Technical Committees/ Subcommittees of IEC. 
The Secretariat of 09 important ISO Committees dealing with subjects that are of interest to 
India are being held by our country through BIS. 
 
BIS has entered into Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) and Mutual Recognition 
Agreements (MRAs) with the National Standards Bodies of various countries for cooperation 
in the areas of standards, Conformity assessment, testing and training/ capacity building and 
for mutual acceptance of each other’s conformity assessment results respectively. BIS has 
so far signed 28 MoUs and076 MRAs of which 04 MoUs were concluded during 2017-18. 
 
TECHNICAL INFORMATION SERVICES & WTO-TBT ENQUIRY POINT 
 
BIS provides technical information services in the field of standards and conformity 
assessment to industry, importers, exporters and government agencies in response to their 
enquiries. 429 enquiries were responded during the period from April 2017 to March 2018.

--- Page 5 ---
5 
 
 
Sponsorship of Identification Numbers 
 
 Issuer Identification Number (IIN) 
 
BIS facilitates issue of IINs as per ISO/IEC 7812 ‘Identification Cards - Identification of 
issuers’ by sponsoring applications of Banks/ Financial Organizations to the American 
Bankers Association (ABA). The ISO/IEC 7812 specifies a numbering system for the 
identification of issuers of the identification cards used in international and/ or inter-industry 
interchange. During this period, BIS had taken up the application of M/s National Payment 
Cooperation of India (NPCI), (an autonomous body set up by the Reserve Bank of India as 
an Umbrella organization for retail payments in India) for allotment of 3000 IINs under Card 
Scheme Block Holder, for enabling them to further the Government of India initiative of Digital 
India. 
 
 World Manufacturer Identifier (WMI) Number 
 
In co-ordination with the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), USA; BIS issues WMI 
Codes as per ISO 3780 : 2009 ‘Road Vehicles - World Manufacturer Identifier (WMI) Code’ 
to automobile manufacturers and exporters in India. 129 WMI Codes have been allotted to 
various vehicle manufacturers during 2017-18. 
 
 
TRAINING SERVICES 
 
National Institute of Training for Standardization (NITS) was set up under the aegis of BIS in 
1995 to meet the growing needs and expectations of the industry for quality training in the 
fields of standardization, quality assurance, management systems, certification, laboratory 
testing, etc.  NITS has also been organizing various International Training Programmes for 
the developing countries of Asia, Africa, Europe and Latin and South America.  The 
programmes are conducted by a team of well-experienced, qualified and trained faculty. 
 
During year 2017-18, NITS conducted a number of training programmes for the Industry, 
International participants and BIS employees. There has been an increase in the number of 
programmes organized during the period as well as the number of persons trained vis-à-vis 
the number of programmes carried out and the number of persons trained in the previous 
years. The total number of programmes conducted during this period is 166. The number of 
personnel trained during 2017-18 for the industry was 2679 which is about 13.8% more than 
the last year figures of 2355. 
 
 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
 
BIS endeavours to provide its services and the benefits of standardization and certification 
to all its stakeholders in a focused manner. The Consumer Affairs department of BIS handles 
various consumer related activities which include redressal of public grievances, organizing 
various awareness programmes for the stakeholders of BIS and holding of World Standards 
Day.

--- Page 6 ---
6 
During the year, 208 consumer awareness programmes, 71 Industry awareness 
programmes, 36 Educational Utilization of Standards Programmes were organized across 
the country. 
 
World Standards Day :  
 
BIS celebrated the World Standards Day on 03 November 2017 at New Delhi to pay tribute 
to the collaborative efforts of thousands of experts worldwide, who develop voluntary 
technical agreements that are published as International or National Standards. The World 
Standards Day theme for the year 2017 was ‘Standards Make Cities Smarter’. BIS on the 
occasion also organized a seminar on this theme. World Standards Day programmes were 
also held across the country by BIS Regional and Branch Offices. 
 
 
PUBILCITY 
 
The publicity activity of BIS is aimed at creating awareness for various BIS activities among 
its target audience including the Industry and common Consumer, significantly relating to 
Standardization, Certification of goods & services and Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery. The 
publicity was done through print, electronic and outdoor media. 
 
Aggressive publicity campaigns were taken up aiming at persuading consumers to buy ISI 
Marked goods and Hallmarked Gold Jewellery. Consumers were also informed about the 
mechanism regarding the redressal of complaints relating to BIS. BIS also participated in 
popular consumer and industrial fairs/exhibitions to disseminate information on the various 
activities of BIS. 
 
 
SALE OF STANDARDS AND OTHER PUBLICATIONS 
 
BIS sells Indian Standards and Special Publications through 25 different sales outlets located 
at the Headquarters (HQs), Regional Offices and Branch Offices. Sale is also done through 
registered booksellers. BIS also sells foreign standards (ISO, IEC, BSI London, DIN 
Germany, JIS Japan) in India. BIS also sells Indian Standards through e-portal.  Standards 
can be downloaded in the form of soft copy.  Alternatively, an order for hard copy can be 
placed through the e-portal.  Online payment can be made over the portal through credit/debit 
card. Customers can also make payment for standards through NEFT/RTGS. 
 
 
HINDI ACTIVITIES 
 
BIS is following all the act, rules, directions and orders issued by the Department of Official 
Language regarding official language. Official Language Committee of HQ conducted all its 
four quarterly meetings on time. The Second Sub Committee of Committee of Parliament on 
Official Language inspected Hyderabad and Pune BOs on 25 April 2017 and 24 February 
2018. The Committee expressed satisfaction over the progressive use of Hindi in BIS. During 
the year, 13 standards were translated and titles of 350 standards were also made bilingual.

--- Page 7 ---
7 
PLAN SCHEMES 
 
Hallmarking: 
 
BIS has been implementing the Plan scheme for setting up of gold Assaying and Hallmarking 
(A&H) centres in India with central assistance. The scheme on Hallmarking, operative since 
the Xth Plan has continued in the XIIth Plan. 
 
During 2017-18, BIS received ₹ 100 lakhs under this scheme and spent ₹ 72.68 lakhs. 18 
artisan training programmes, 07 A&H personnel training programmes and one Training of 
Trainers programme were conducted. 
 
National System for Standardization: 
 
The scheme on National System of Standardization (NSS) which commenced during the XIth 
Plan has continued to operate in the XIIth Plan. 
 
During 2017-18, BIS has spent about Rs. 174.60 lakhs and Rs. 100 lakh grant received for 
NSS activities. 
 
 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SERVICES 
 
In line with the Government’s initiatives for computerization and to make day to day 
functioning of BIS online, IT is being enabled as a strategic resource for development and 
continual improvement of systems. The overall objective is to improve services by increasing 
efficiency, transparency and ensuring reliability and timely delivery to BIS stakeholders. 
 
 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND WORKS 
 
The works relating to construction of new office buildings for BIS Offices and renovation 
works in existing buildings is undertaken by Project Management and Works Department 
(PMWD) of BIS.   
 
PMWD has also undertaken a 'green' initiative under which projects for installation of Rooftop 
Solar Power Plants in BIS buildings are being undertaken through the Solar Energy 
Corporation of India.  
 
 
VIGILANCE ACTIVITIES 
 
The vigilance set up of Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) is headed by the Chief Vigilance 
Officer (CVO) and comprises of Vigilance Department at BIS Headquarters and a Vigilance 
Section in the Secretariat of each of the Disciplinary Authority for Group B, C & D employees 
(Deputy Director General concerned). 
 
The Vigilance Department functions in close coordination with Central Vigilance Commission 
(CVC), Central Bureau of Investigations (CBI) and Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food &

--- Page 8 ---
8 
Public Distribution.  It is entrusted with the responsibility of managing all vigilance related 
activities of the Bureau in accordance with the guidelines on the subject issued by Central 
Vigilance Commission and DoPT etc. 
 
HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT, ADMINISTRATION AND 
GENERAL SERVICES 
 
Recruitment - During the year, 13 scientists in waiting list of the recruitment process of 
2015-16 joined as Scientist-B through direct recruitment. 
 
Swachh Bharat Mission - The Swachh Bharat drive was carried out in BIS in three phase                
i.e. 16 May to 31 May 2017, 15 September 2017 -02 October 2017, 16 February 2018 to 28 February 
2018. 
Staff Welfare - BIS continued its welfare measures for its employees namely by way of 
Group Insurance Schemes, facility of Holiday Homes, subsidized refreshments, provision of 
newspapers at the reception counter and to officers of the level of Deputy Director General 
and above, Children Scholarship Scheme, etc. 
 
Library Services - BIS technical Library located at Headquarters is a national resources 
centre for information on standards and related matters and meets the needs of industry, 
trade, government, researchers and consumers alike. 
SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WORKING WOMEN AT WORKPLACE -  In compliance with 
the guidelines of the Supreme Court of India on the prevention of sexual harassment of 
women at work place, an Internal Complaints Committee was constituted in Bureau of Indian 
Standards in Feb 1998 that has since been reconstituted vide OM No. Estt-
III/ICC/76:01/2018 dated 09 January 2018. The Composition of the newly constituted Internal 
Complains Committee (ICC) at BIS, HQ- New Delhi consists of a senior level women 
employee as Presiding Officer along with two other members from BIS-HQ and one of the 
members from All India Democratic Women’s Association (AIDWA), New Delhi. The Internal 
Complaints Committee (ICC-HQ) celebrated “International Women’s Day at BIS, HQ- New 
Delhi on 08 March 2018 with the participation of Women employees posted at BIS, HQ-New 
Delhi ; and at BIS Offices in NCR, i.e Faridabad, Ghaziabad, Central Laboratory, NITS, Noida. 
 
FINANCE ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
 
For the Twenty Ninth consecutive year i.e. 2017-18, Bureau of Indian Standards continued 
to be self-reliant in meeting its expenditure and other liabilities.  Total income (excluding 
income from investment) during the year 2017-18   amounted to Rs. 58736.57 lakh as against 
Rs.45663.38 lakh in the previous year resulting in an increase of 28.63%.  The largest 
contribution to the income was from Product Certification Marking Fee which stood at Rs. 
49875.82 lakh against Rs. 38930.80 lakh in the previous year i.e. an increase of 28.11%. 
The total revenue expenditure during the year 2017-18 amounted to Rs. 27168.34 lakh as 
against Rs.21633.58 lakh in 2016-17 registering a increase of 25.58%.