--- Page 1 ---
1 
Annexure 1 
REVIEW OF BIS ANNUAL REPORT 2019-20 
 
The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), the National Standard Body of India was established 
under the BIS Act 1986, assuming the functions of the erstwhile Indian Standards Institution 
(ISI). BIS is responsible for the harmonious development of the activities of standardization 
and quality certification of goods and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
 
The Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016, was published for general information in official 
gazette on 22 March 2016. 
 
Major achievements of BIS during the year 2019-20, as reported in its Annual Report are 
summarized below: 
 
STANDARDIZATION 
 
The process of standards development adopted by BIS follows internationally accepted good 
standardization practices and is in compliance with the WTO-TBT code of good practice for 
preparation, adoption and application of standards. In the development of National 
Standards, BIS provides all interested stakeholders, with a neutral platform to come together 
and work towards common agreements. BIS provides a forum for Sectional Committees, 
representing over a thousand experts from organized consumers and consumer bodies, 
regulatory and other government bodies, industries, scientists, technologists, testing 
organizations and individual experts. These committees work to develop consensus based 
voluntary National standards with stakeholder consultations. 
 
During 2019-20, 1091 (647 new and 444 revised) standards were published. The total 
number of standards in force, as on 31 March 2020 was 20845. 
 
CERTIFICATION 
 
During 2019-20, BIS operated the Product Certification Scheme under the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules framed there-under and BIS (Conformity Assessment) 
Regulations, 2018. Under this Certification scheme, a manufacturer of a particular product is 
given the self-marking rights of the BIS standards mark (ISI mark) on his product after 
ensuring that his product complies with the relevant Indian Standard. Presence of Standard 
Mark (popularly known as ISI mark) on a product indicates its conformity to the relevant 
Indian Standard. The certification scheme is voluntary in nature, except for 211 product 
standards that have been made mandatory by the Central Government on considerations of 
health and safety of the consumer.

--- Page 2 ---
2 
During the 2019-20, 4159 new licences were granted, which include 40 products covered for 
the first time under the scheme. The total number of Indian Standards which have been 
covered so far under BIS Certification Marks Scheme up to March 2020 was 976. The total 
number of operative licences held by domestic manufacturers as on 31 March 2020 were 
35623. 
 
In order to monitor the operation of licences, during the year, a total number of 21307 
inspections were carried out.  
 
A total of 69 licensee/industry meets were conducted in 2019-20 to raise awareness about 
BIS Certification activities. 
 
Foreign Manufactures Certification Scheme (FMCS) 
 
BIS has been operating separate Scheme for foreign manufacturers. Under this Scheme, 
foreign manufacturers can seek certification from BIS for use of BIS Standard Mark on their 
product(s). During 2019-20, 231 licences were issued under FMCS, taking the total number of 
operative licences to 1089 against 117 Indian Standards. The licences granted covered 
products such as steel & steel products; cement; PVC insulated cables; tyres & tubes for 
automotive vehicles; plastic feeding bottles; switchgear products; plugs & socket-outlets and 
switches; HDPE & UPVC Pipes; Infant milk formula; ac static energy meters etc. from about 
51 countries. 
 
Compulsory Registration Scheme (CRS) 
 
The Compulsory Registration Scheme is being operated by BIS under the Scheme – II of 
Schedule – II of the BIS (Conformity Assessment) Regulations, 2018. The introduction of 
CRS is an alternative mechanism to the Compulsory Certification to facilitate growth of fast 
growing sectors like IT and protect consumers from spurious and sub-standard products 
manufactured in India or abroad. The process of Registration has been reengineered and 
revamped to make it SMART. SMART Registration is aimed to make the process of 
Registration fast, transparent and completely paperless with a click of button 
 
The first licence was granted by BIS in June 2013. As on 31 March 2020, BIS has granted 
22260 licences to manufacturers in various countries including domestic manufacturers. 
 
LABORATORY SERVICES 
 
One of the main pillars of conformity assessment is product testing to ascertain the conformity 
of products to relevant standards. BIS has established eight laboratories in the country to 
cater to the testing need of samples generated from conformity assessment schemes,

--- Page 3 ---
3 
beginning with the establishment of Central Laboratory at Sahibabad in 1962. Subsequently, 
four regional laboratories at Mohali, Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai and three branch office 
laboratories at Patna, Bangalore and Guwahati were established. BIS laboratories have 
facilities for testing of products in the field of chemical, microbiological, electrical and 
mechanical requirements. In addition to product testing, BIS has established gold assaying 
lab at Chennai, Sahibabad and Kolkata. Gold assaying lab at Chennai is a referral lab and 
also tests silver jewellery. 
 
BIS labs have complete test facilities for 398 Indian Standards and in addition, partial test 
facilities are also available for 320 Indian Standards.  During the year 2019-20, the BIS 
laboratories have tested 18853 samples of various products covered under Certification.  
 
Lab Recognition Scheme 
BIS has established Laboratory Recognition Scheme (LRS) for recognition of outside 
laboratories (OSLs). The services of such laboratories are utilized when it is economically 
not viable to develop test facilities in BIS labs or when BIS labs are overloaded. The scheme 
is based on International Standard IS/ISO/IEC 17025, and in line with the criteria adopted by 
the National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) for 
accreditation of laboratories.  
During the year, 13 new labs were recognized and 05 labs were de-recognized. As on 31 
March 2020, the total no. of operative BIS recognized labs were 246, which include reputed 
R&D organizations, technical institutions, Govt. labs and Private sector labs (Government 
labs – 77 and Private labs - 169).  Besides this, services of 255 Government laboratories of 
specialized nature are utilized for different products, as and when required.   
To support the newly launched BIS Compulsory Registration Scheme, 65 outside labs are 
testing IT products, which were covered under Electronics and Information Technology 
Goods (Requirement for Compulsory Registration) Order, 2012. 
 
Quality Assurance Activities 
Quality Assurance is a regular part of testing in BIS Labs by way of which the quality of testing 
is assured. During the year, 650 Samples were tested under Quality Assurance activities by 
BIS Labs. These also include the samples tested during participation in proficiency testing/ 
inter-lab comparison program. 
 
New Initiatives under Laboratory Activities 
 
National Lab Directory: BIS created a National Laboratory Directory which was launched 
by Shri Ram Vilas Paswan, Hon’ble Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution on 30 August 2019. This directory is an online platform created on the basis of 
self-entry by testing laboratories about the available testing facilities in their labs and aims to

--- Page 4 ---
4 
bring together the information about test facilities available in the country on a single online 
platform for use by various stakeholders. 
 
Drinking Water Quality Testing: In keeping with the objectives of the Jal Jeevan Mission 
of Hon’ble Prime Minister, BIS, as per the directions of Ministry of Consumer Affairs Food & 
PD, undertook a study of the quality of piped drinking water being supplied in the country. 
 
Workshop on Standard for Drinking Water: A One Day Workshop on ‘Ensuring Quality of 
Piped Drinking Water’ was organized by BIS on 09 December 2019 with an aim to 
disseminate the information about the requirements of IS 10500:2012 and other Indian 
Standards. The workshop was inaugurated by Shri Ram Vilas Paswan, Union Minister for 
Consumer Affairs Food & Public Distribution 
 
HALLMARKING 
 
Hallmarking of gold jewellery was launched by BIS in April 2000 to provide third party 
assurance to consumers on the purity of gold jewellery or its fineness. The scheme for 
Hallmarking of silver jewellery/ artefacts was launched in October 2005. Under these 
Scheme, while the jewellers are granted licence to sell hallmarked jewellery, Assaying & 
Hallmarking (A&H) centres are recognized to assay the purity of the jewellery submitted by 
the licensed jeweller, along with declaration of purity.  
 
As on 31 March 2020, the number of operative licences for Hallmarking of gold and silver 
jewellery were 28070 and 2556 respectively. The number of operative BIS recognized A&H 
centres was 915. During the year, 3.89 crore articles of gold and silver jewellery/ artefacts 
were hallmarked.  
 
Hallmark of Gold Bullion/Coin 
Hallmarking of gold Bullion/Coin in the fineness of 999 & 995 by giving licence to 
refineries/Mint was started in October 2015. As on 31 March 2020, 29 licences have been 
granted to refineries/ India Government Mint for Gold bullion and coin.  
 
Gold Monetization Scheme 
Government of India has launched Gold Monetization Scheme on 5 November 2015. BIS 
has played an important role in finalization and implementation of the Gold Monetization 
Scheme in association with Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance and 
Reserve Bank of India. Under the scheme, A&H Centres recognized by BIS have been 
qualified to act as Collection and Purity Testing Centres (CPTCs). So far 48 A&H centres 
and one Jeweller have been qualified to act as CPTC. The gold collected by CPTCs is to be 
refined by refineries licenced by BIS.

--- Page 5 ---
5 
Promotion of Hallmarking 
 
To promote hallmarking in the country and for effective consumer protection, awareness 
programmes are organized by BIS through its various Regional and Branch offices across 
the country. During 2019-29, 78 such jewellers’ awareness programmes were organized.  
 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM CERTIFICATION 
 
In the year 2019-2020, BIS has launched the following four Management Systems 
Certification Schemes: Educational Organizations Quality Management System as per 
IS/ISO 21001: 2019, Medical Devices Quality Management System with Essential Principles 
of Safety and Performance as per IS 23485: 2019, Anti- Bribery Management System as per 
IS/ ISO 37001: 2016 and Information Security Management System as per IS/ISO 27001: 
2013. This took the count to 17 Management Systems Certification Schemes being operated 
by BIS as on 31 March 2020. 
 
As on 31 March 2020, a total of 1284 operative licences exist under the Management 
Systems Certification Schemes in operation in BIS. 
 
INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES AND TECHNICAL INFORMATION SERVICES 
 
BIS in its capacity as the National Standards Body of India, is a member of International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) and through the Indian National Committee is a 
member of International Electro-technical Commission (IEC). BIS actively participates in the 
activities of these International bodies and is involved in development of International 
Standards as Participating (P) member or Observer (O) member on various Technical 
Committees and Sub-Committees; and nominates technical experts in Working Groups of 
these bodies.  
 
As on 31 March 2020, BIS is a ‘P’ member in 470 Technical Committees/ Subcommittees of 
ISO and 96 Technical Committees/Subcommittees of IEC, and ‘O’ Member in 197 Technical 
Committees/Subcommittees of ISO and 74 Technical Committees/ Subcommittees of IEC. 
The Secretariat of 10 important ISO Committees dealing with subjects that are of interest to 
India are being held by our country through BIS. Chairmanship of three IEC Technical 
Committee/ Subcommittee/ Systems Committee and vice chair of one Systems Committee 
are also held by India. 
 
BIS has successfully contested for ISO Technical Management Board (TMB), the apex body 
of ISO for technical issues and is currently a member of TMB for the term 2020-2022 starting 
from 01 January 2020.

--- Page 6 ---
6 
BIS has entered into Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) and Bilateral Cooperation 
Agreements (BCAs) with the National Standards Bodies of various countries for cooperation 
in the areas of standards, Conformity assessment, testing and training/ capacity building and 
for mutual acceptance of each other’s conformity assessment results respectively. BIS has 
so far signed 30 MoUs and 07 BCAs. 
 
TECHNICAL INFORMATION SERVICES & WTO-TBT ENQUIRY POINT 
 
BIS provides technical information services in the field of standards and conformity 
assessment to industry, importers, exporters and government agencies in response to their 
enquiries. Around 150 enquiries were responded during the period from April 2019 to March 
2020. 
 
Sponsorship of Identification Numbers 
 
 Issuer Identification Number (IIN) 
BIS facilitates issue of IINs as per ISO/IEC 7812 ‘Identification Cards - Identification of 
issuers’ by sponsoring applications of Banks/ Financial Organizations to the American 
Bankers Association (ABA). The ISO/IEC 7812 specifies a numbering system for the 
identification of issuers of the identification cards used in international and/ or inter-industry 
interchange.  
 
 World Manufacturer Identifier (WMI) Number 
In co-ordination with the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), USA; BIS issues WMI 
Codes as per ISO 3780 : 2009 ‘Road Vehicles - World Manufacturer Identifier (WMI) Code’ 
to automobile manufacturers and exporters in India. 204 WMI Codes have been allotted to 
various vehicle manufacturers during 2019-20. 
 
TRAINING SERVICES 
 
National Institute of Training for Standardization (NITS) was set up under the aegis of BIS in 
1995 to meet the growing needs and expectations of the industry for quality training in the 
fields of standardization, quality assurance, management systems, certification, laboratory 
testing, etc.  NITS has also been organizing various International Training Programmes for 
the developing countries of Asia, Africa, Europe and Latin and South America.  The 
programmes are conducted by a team of well-experienced, qualified and trained faculty. 
 
During year 2019-20, NITS conducted a number of training programmes for the Industry, 
International participants and BIS employees. The total number of programmes conducted 
during this period is 174. The number of personnel trained during 2019-20 was 3032.

--- Page 7 ---
7 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS & PUBLICITY 
 
BIS endeavours to provide its services and the benefits of standardization and certification 
to all its stakeholders in a focused manner. Think, Nudge and Move Department of BIS 
handles various consumer related activities which include redressal of public grievances, 
organizing various awareness programmes for the stakeholders of BIS, holding of World 
Standards Day and publicity related activities. 
 
During the year, 199 consumer awareness programmes, 69 Industry awareness 
programmes, 27 Educational Utilization of Standards Programmes were organized across 
the country. 
 
During 2019-20, 143 complaints related to quality of BIS Standard marked products and 
unauthorized use of BIS Standard mark were redressed. BIS carried out 104 Search & 
Seizures all over the country on firms misusing ISI Mark and such products were seized. 
 
World Standards Day  
BIS celebrated the World Standards Day on 14 October 2019 at New Delhi to pay tribute to 
the collaborative efforts of thousands of experts worldwide, which develop voluntary technical 
agreements that are published as International or National Standards. The World Standards 
Day theme for the year 2019 was ‘Video Standards Create a Global Stage’. BIS on the 
occasion organized seminars on this theme. World Standards Day programmes were also 
held across the country by BIS Regional and Branch Offices. 
 
Publicity 
BIS creates awareness about its various activities through print, electronic, outdoor and 
digital media. In 2019-20, publicity campaigns were executed to promote importance of ISI-
Mark, Hallmark on gold jewellery and compulsory registration scheme. BIS is also active on 
all popular social media platforms and posts are regularly uploaded regarding importance of 
Standards, other key activities of BIS and events. 
 
SALE OF STANDARDS AND OTHER PUBLICATIONS 
 
BIS sells Indian Standards (IS) and Special Publications (SP) through 25 different sales 
outlets located at the Headquarters (HQs), Regional and Branch Offices. Sale is also done 
through registered booksellers spread across major cities of India. BIS also sells foreign 
standards (ISO, IEC, BSI London, DIN Germany, JIS Japan) in India from BIS Headquarters 
(HQs). In addition, Indian Standards and Special Publications are also sold through e-portal 
(www.standardsbis.bsbedge.com). Indian Standards are now available free of cost in 
downloadable version for non-commercial purposes through e-portal. Alternatively, an order 
for hard copy can be placed through the e-portal. Online payment can be made over the

--- Page 8 ---
8 
portal through credit/debit card. Facility is available to make payment for purchase of Indian 
Standards through NEFT/RTGS (online transfer). 
 
HINDI ACTIVITIES 
 
BIS is following all the Acts, rules, directions and orders issued by the Department of Official 
Language regarding official language. Official Language Committee of HQ conducted all its 
four quarterly meetings on time. The Second Sub Committee of Committee of Parliament on 
Official Language inspected Jaipur Branch Office on 28 December 2019 and Ahmedabad 
Branch Office on 27 February 2020. The Committee expressed satisfaction over the 
progressive use of Hindi in BIS. During the year, around titles of 720 standards were made 
bilingual. Hindi Pakhwada and workshops were also organized during the year. 
 
PLAN SCHEMES 
 
Hallmarking: 
 
BIS has been implementing the Plan scheme for setting up of gold Assaying and Hallmarking 
(A&H) centres in India with central assistance.  
 
During 2019-20, BIS received ₹ 100 lakhs under this scheme and spent ₹ 10.49 lakhs. 
Sixteen programmes were organized for training of artisans, nine programmes were 
organized for Training of Assaying & Hallmarking personnel and one programme was 
organised for training of BIS officers during 2019-20.  
 
National System for Standardization: 
 
The scheme on National System for Standardization (NSS) under plan scheme is in 
operation. 
 
During 2019-20, BIS received ₹ 100 lakhs under this scheme and an amount of ₹ 93.38 
lakhs has been utilized. 
 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SERVICES 
 
In line with the Government of India’s vision of Digital India and Ease of doing business, BIS 
is actively progressing towards automating all its activities through development and 
implementation of software applications/online portals under e-BIS project. It is making all 
efforts to render software solutions/online portals user-friendly and creating a platform for 
ease of doing business for its various stakeholders.

--- Page 9 ---
9 
A new comprehensive software (e-BIS) has been envisaged encompassing all activities of 
BIS and with advanced features like data analytics, artificial intelligence, good MIS for 
effective monitoring, user-friendly interfaces, etc. The e-BIS will provide an integrated 
platform for all stakeholders-Industry, Consumers, Labs, BIS, etc. Various Discussion Foras 
and Recommendation Forums have been constituted for timely finalization of requirements. 
 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND WORKS 
 
BIS has undertaken a Project of Renovation of all BIS Labs namely NROL, CL, SROL, 
WROL, EROL, PBOL, GBOL, BNBOL to make them world-class in terms of infrastructure 
and testing facilities. 
 
BIS has also undertaken a 'green' initiative under which Rooftop Solar Power Plants have 
been installed in BIS buildings through the Solar Energy Corporation of India and gains were 
also made from net metering systems installed. 
 
VIGILANCE ACTIVITIES 
 
The vigilance Set up of Bureau of Indian Standards is headed by the Chief Vigilance Officer 
and comprises of Vigilance Department at BIS Headquarters and a Vigilance Section in the 
Secretariat of each of the Disciplinary Authority for Group B & C employees (Deputy Director 
General concerned).  
 
The Vigilance Department functions in close coordination with Central Vigilance Commission 
(CVC), Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution. It is entrusted with the responsibility of managing all vigilance related activities 
of the Bureau in accordance with the guidelines on the subject issued by Central Vigilance 
Commission, DoPT etc. 
 
HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT, ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL SERVICES 
 
As on 31 March 2020, 1186 employees were on the rolls of BIS. 
 
Swachh Bharat Mission – During the year 2019-20, the Swachh Bharat drive was carried 
out in BIS in two phases i.e. 11 September 2019 - 02 October 2019 and 16 February 
2020 to 28 February 2020. 
 
Staff Welfare - BIS continued its welfare measures for its employees namely by way of 
Group Insurance Schemes, facility of Holiday Homes, subsidized refreshments, medical 
facilities, Children Scholarship Scheme etc.

--- Page 10 ---
10 
Library Services - BIS technical Library located at Headquarters is a national resources 
centre for information on standards and related matters and meets the needs of industry, 
trade, government, researchers and consumers alike. 
 
Sexual Harassment of Working Women at Workplace - In compliance with the guidelines 
of the Supreme Court of India on the prevention of sexual harassment of women at work 
place, and later on under POSH Act, an Internal Complaints Committee was constituted in 
Bureau of Indian Standards in Feb 1998 that has since been reconstituted in January 2020. 
The Composition of the newly constituted Internal Complaints Committee (ICC) at BIS, HQ- 
New Delhi consists of a senior level woman employee as Presiding Officer along with two 
other members from BIS-HQ and one of the members from All India Democratic Women’s 
Association (AIDWA), New Delhi. The ICC is proactively functioning in BIS under the POSH 
Act. 
 
FINANCE  
 
For the 31st consecutive year i.e. 2019-20, Bureau of Indian Standards continued to be self-
reliant in meeting its expenditure and other liabilities. The total income (excluding income 
from investment) during the year 2019-20 amounted to ₹ 77023.69 lakh as against ₹ 
70579.52 lakh in the previous year resulting in an increase of 9.13%. The largest contribution 
to the income was from Product Certification Marking Fee which stood at ₹ 61677.06 lakh 
against ₹ 55410.11 lakh in the previous year i.e. an increase of 11.31%. The total revenue 
expenditure during the year 2019-20 amounted to ₹ 28573.21 lakh as against ₹ 27901.09 
lakh in 2018-19 registering an increase of 2.41%.